Coder Reliability and Misclassification in
Comparative Manifesto Project Codings∗
Slava Mikhaylov
Trinity College Dublin
mikhailv@tcd.ie
Michael Laver
New York University
michael.laver@nyu.edu
Kenneth Benoit
Trinity College Dublin
kbenoit@tcd.ie
March 31, 2008
Abstract
The long time series of estimated party policy positions generated by the Comparative Manifesto
Project (CMP) is the only such time series available to the profession and has been extensively
used in a wide variety of applications. Recent work (e.g. Benoit, Laver, and Mikhaylov 2007;
Klingemann et. al. 2006, chs. 4–5) focuses on non-systematic sources of error in these estimates that
arise from the text generation process. Our concern here, by contrast, is with error that arises during
the text coding process, since nearly all manifestos are coded only once by a single coder. First,
we discuss reliability and misclassification in the context of hand-coded content analysis methods.
Second, we report results of a coding experiment that used trained human coders to code sample
manifestos provided by the CMP, allowing us to estimate the reliability of both coders and coding
categories. Third, we compare our test codings to the published CMP “gold standard” codings of the
test documents to assess accuracy, and produce empirical estimates of a misclassification matrix for
each coding category. Finally, we demonstrate the effect of coding misclassification on the CMP’s
most widely used index, its left-right scale, and draw conclusions for future use and design of the
CMP data.
Key Words: Comparative Manifesto Project, content analysis, measurement error, misclassification.
∗Prepared for presentation at the 66th MPSA Annual National Conference, Palmer House Hilton Hotel and Towers, April
3–6, 2008. Our heartfelt thanks goes out to all of the volunteer test coders who completed the on-line coder tests used in the
research for this paper. We also thank Andrea Volkens for cooperation and assistance with details of the coding process.
1 Reliability versus Validity in Content Analysis
Sooner or later, anyone interested in measuring policy positions of political actors turns to the systematic
analysis of political texts. Measuring policy positions by analyzing political texts satisfies a number of
key scientific criteria. The act of measurement does not disturb what is being measured, a claim difficult
to sustain for any type of survey, during which ideas can be put into people’s heads by the very questions
they are asked. Once deposited on record, text lasts forever, in contrast to surveys, which cannot be
conducted in the past. Once captured, text does does not change, and this makes it possible to devise
computational techniques that always yield the same result when applied to the same text, a quality of
reproducibility that will not apply to repeated questioning of survey respondents. Nor does text wear
out, once captured, no matter how many times we torture it through repeated analysis. Once we have
captured an expert survey panel, by contrast, we can only torture them so often without polluting our
source of data.
Text is plentiful and cheap. Indeed, in contrast to the typical data problems facing researchers in
the social sciences, the main problem with text data is that there is too much of it, not too little. This
cornucopia of text confronts us with two particular problems. The first concerns which texts to analyze—
essentially a problem of content validity. No matter how sophisticated our analysis of a given text, our
results are of no value if the text is not a valid source of information about the matter under investigation.
Putting aside this obvious though difficult matter, however, our focus in this paper concerns the second
problem: how best to estimate policy positions from a valid text corpus. Since this corpus must be
vastly reduced in complexity in order to be of any use to social scientists, this implies developing a
systematic scheme for converting the text into usable quantities. The most common approach by far is
to analyze the content of texts using a categorical scheme consisting of two steps (Krippendorff 2004,
219). First, texts are parsed into smaller units relevant to the research question, such as words, sentences,
or quasi-sentences, depending on the research design. Following this first step of unitization, a second
step involves coding each unit by assigning a category from the coding scheme to each text unit. Both
steps can be held to scrutiny according not just to the validity of the resulting information, but also for
the reliability of the procedure, two criteria that often trade off with one another in practice.
Whenever non-deterministic instruments—such as human beings—are used to unitize and code
texts, then the content analysis procedure faces potential problems with reliability. Depending on how
unreliable the procedure is, estimates constructed from the codings may lack validity because of the
noise or even bias introduced by the content analysis procedure. Reliability is no guarantee of validity,
2
however, and in practice validity tends to suffer in the pursuit of maximizing reliability. Indeed, the
debate over computerized versus hand-coded content analysis largely revolves around the tradeoff be-
tween reliability and validity. Proponents of computerized schemes for estimating party positions from
political manifestos (e.g. Laver, Benoit & Garry 2003, Laver & Garry 2000, Slapin & Proksch 2007) cite
perfect reliability in their favor, and struggle to demonstrate validity, while hand-coded schemes such as
the CMP claim validity as a central advantage and then devote huge resources to attempts to enhance
reliability (see for instance Klingemann, Volkens, Bara, Budge & McDonald (2006) chs. 4–5).
As a thought experiment, suppose we want to estimate the position on a left-right scale of French
president Nicolas Sarkozy, using as texts the complete set of speeches he made on the record during
2007. We could count the frequencies nl , nr of the letters “l” and “r” in each text and measure the
Sarkozy’s position on a left right policy scale as (nr− nl )/(nr + nl ). This would be a superbly reliable
technique, easily implemented using computers, but probably also possible using chimpanzees trained
in character recognition. Anyone claiming it as a valid measure, however, would be pitied rather than
published. Nor is the problem cured by taking account of the fact that the speeches are in French and
redefining the measure using frequencies of the letters “g” and “d”. Rather, the problem is that this overly
simplistic coding scheme does not link the text units or the coding frame to valid verbal manifestations
of politically left or right policy, even though either computers or trained monkeys could implement it
with a perfect or at least very high degree of reliability.
We could vastly improve on validity by selecting a better coding scheme. Leaving aside more
nuanced ideological differences for the moment, assume we propose a new coding scheme consisting
of two categories, “left” and “right”, and that the task is to tag each sentence from Sarkozy’s speeches
according to this binary classification. To code the texts with this scheme, we could recruit a panel of
scholars accepted within the profession as the world’s greatest experts on French politics, ask them to
read the Sarkozy speeches and then classify each sentence as left or right. Every sane person would agree
that our new measure is much more valid than the earlier letter-based approach, but we now have a new
problem in that the experts will surely disagree on how at least some sentences should be classified. The
experts must apply subjective judgments based on their interpretation of the each sentence’s meaning—
indeed this is why we chose them over the chimpanzees, whose expected agreement would have been
25% through pure chance. Subjective judgments are at the very least subject to stochastic variation,
ranging from a sudden bout of acute indigestion on the part of a coder, to the fact that different coders
may have listened to different news stories on different mornings before they began their coding exercise,
3
to different toss-up judgment calls any or all of them might make at any given time. In addition, our
coders might deem that many sentences in Sarkozy’s text that have nothing to do with either left or
right, and as retaliation for the limited choices offered by our coding scheme, may randomly assign such
sentences to “left” or “right”. Even worse, our coders might tend to categorize ambiguous sentences as
“right” given their contextual knowledge about Sarkozy. Either way, our procedure will yield different
answers each time we repeat it, with some sentences being subject to misclassification each time, and
resulting in summary estimates whose validity is now suspect. Part of the problem has arisen from the
fundamentally indeterminate nature of human judgment, but this problem has been compounded by a
poor coding scheme—two interrelated aspects to which we return at length below.
Ideally, of course, we would like the policy positions we estimate from political texts to be valid
and unbiased, constructed from procedures that are perfectly reliable and reproducible. A research
procedure, according to Krippendorff,
is reliable when it responds to the same phenomena in the same way regardless of the cir-
cumstances of its implementation...In content analysis, this means that the reading of textual
data as well as of the research results is replicable elsewhere, that researchers demonstrably
agree on what they are talking about. (Krippendorff 2004, 211)1
In any content analysis scheme using human coders to apply a coding scheme with any degree of mean-
ing, however, perfect reliability is virtually impossible. Our first task as data analysts, therefore, is to
identify and characterize problems of validity and reliability, as well as potential consequences (such
as bias) in our research procedure and resulting estimates. Absent this, our estimates are worthless.
Indeed they are in a real sense worse than worthless since we have no idea at all how good or bad they
are, completely undermining any procedural confidence in the veracity of the results produced by the
research. When it comes to interpreting data, an unreliable research procedure casts basic doubts as to
the meaning of the data and what any analysis of these data would mean (Krippendorff 2004, 212). Our
first priority should therefore be to characterize problems regarding validity, reliability, and bias in our
research procedure, and our second task to work as hard as we can to minimize their effects.
Here our main substantive interest lies in measuring party policy positions on the basis of system-
1Krippendorff (2004, 214) identifies three types of reliability: stability, reproducibility, and accuracy. Stability is concerned
with possible change of coding results on repeated trials. This type of reliability has a coder reanalyzing the same manifesto
after a period of time in order to highlight any intra-coder disagreement. A stronger measure of reliability is reproducibility,
also called inter coder reliability. This measure assesses the degree of replication of coding results by two distinct coders
working separately. It covers intra-coder disagreement and inter-coder differences in interpretation and application of the
coding scheme. Accuracy tests the conformity of coding process and data generation procedure to some canonical standard,
and is perceived to be the strongest test of reliability. It can be used effectively at the training stage when coder’s performance
can be compared to some ‘true’ results.
4
atic analyses of party manifestos conducted by the longstanding Comparative Manifestos Project (CMP)
(Budge, Klingemann, Volkens, Bara & Tanenbaum 2001, Klingemann et al. 2006). CMP data are widely
used by third party researchers to measure policy positions of political parties on an election-by-election
basis, indeed they are profession’s primary source of such data. We know axiomatically that these data
have problems of validity, reliability and bias, just as all data do. The task we set ourselves in this pa-
per is to develop a more systematic characterization of some of these problems than has hitherto been
attempted. In what follows, we set out a framework for reliability and misclassification in categorical
content analysis, and apply framework this to the CMP coding scheme. To come to concrete terms with
reliability and misclassification in the context of the CMP, we designed and carried out a series of coding
experiments on texts for which the CMP has supplied a “correct” coding, and we report on these tests.
Finally, we discuss these results and their implications for continued use of the CMP research. Our aim
in doing this is to increase the professional value of the CMP data by enhancing our ability to draw
reliable, valid and unbiased statistical inferences from these.
2 The CMP Coding Scheme and Sources of Disagreement
Elsewhere (Benoit, Laver & Mikhaylov 2007) we have described the full process generating the CMP
dataset; here our focus is on the coding category scheme and the way that human coders assign these
categories to each text unit. CMP estimates of the policy position of a particular party on a particular
matter at a particular election are generated by using a trained human coder to allocate every “text unit” in
the party’s manifesto into one, and only one, of 57 policy coding categories (one of which is “uncoded”).
The first CMP coding category, for example, is “101: Foreign special relationships: positive”. Having
counted text units allocated to each category, the CMP then uses its theoretical “saliency” model of party
competition to inform a measurement model that defines the relative salience for the party of the policy
area defined by each category as the percentage of all text units allocated to that category. The variable
PER101 in the CMP dataset, therefore, is the percentage of all text units in a party manifesto allocated by
the coder to “101: Foreign special relationships: positive”. Fortunately for third-party users of the CMP
data, it is not necessary to buy into CMP’s distinctive “saliency” model of party competition before using
the data. This is because the CMP coding scheme does not in fact comprise pure saliency categories.
All but one of the 56 substantive categories (the exception is “408: Economic goals”) are positional,
in the sense that category definitions explicitly refer to a position on the policy issue concerned, not
just a mention of this issue. Thus we have both “406: Protectionism positive” and “407: Protectionism
5
negative” when a pure saliency coding scheme would imply just “protectionism: positive, neural or
negative”. It is, precisely, the positional nature of such policy codings that led to the widespread use of
the CMP dataset by scholars seeking times series estimates of party policy positions, as opposed to time
series estimates of the salience attached by parties to particular policy issues.
In what follows, we leave to others the important question of whether party manifestos are valid
sources of information about the policy positions of political parties. We leave for future work the
potential for coding bias, which arises because human coders are inevitably aware of the authorship of
the texts they are coding, a problem especially acute for highly self-referential documents such as party
manifestos. We deal elsewhere (Benoit, Laver & Mikhaylov 2007) with non-systematic measurement
error in CMP data that arises from stochastic features of the text generation process. Here, we focus on
error arising in CMP data from stochastic features of the text coding process.
2 We refer to this coding
error in general terms as misclassification.
2.1 Coding differences from human “features”
CMP data are fundamentally susceptible to coding error because, of their essence, they derive from
subjective judgments made by human coders. These days, indeed, human coding is preferred to machine
coding in settings where it is explicitly felt that subjective coding by human experts is more valid than
objective coding by machines. Coding error arises because different human coders at the same time, or
the same human coder at different times, are likely to code the same text in somewhat different ways.
This process may be unbiased, in the sense that we can think of an unobservable “true and certain” value
of the quantity being measured, with each human text coding being a noisy realization of this. Assuming
unbiased coding, we can take the mean of the noisy realizations as an estimate of the unobservable latent
quantity, and the variation in these observations as a measure of the uncertainty of this estimate.3
The CMP data, however, are generated by party manifestos coded once, and once only, by a single
human coder. There is no variation in noisy realizations of the unobservable underlying quantity and thus
no estimate can be formed of the uncertainty of CMP estimates arising from coding errors. In a nutshell,
we have no way of knowing whether subsequent codings of the same manifesto would be exactly the
2Note that another known source of random variation in the coding process is the difference in the unitization of texts by
CMP coders into “quasi-sentences,” the basic text unit for the CMP scheme. In previous work (Benoit, Laver & Mikhaylov
2007) we have estimated that unitization variance in the CMP manifesto is typically on the order of +/-10% of the total quasi-
sentence units in a text, based on reports in Volkens (2001a, 38).
3We do not deal here with a deep and interesting possibility that has largely been ignored, that the latent quantity being
measured has an uncertain value—in this context that party policy on some issue is vague. In this case, it may be that variation
in realizations of this latent quantity arises not just from measurement noise, but from fundamental uncertainty in the quantity
being measured.
6
same as, or completely different from, the recorded coding that goes into the CMP dataset. We are very
confident, however, on the basis of both anecdotal evidence and good old fashioned common sense that,
if there were to be a series of independent codings of the same manifesto, then these would all differ at
least somewhat from each other. Indeed, if someone reported that 1,000 highly trained coders had each
coded 10,000 manifesto text units using the CMP’s 57 category scheme, and that every single coder had
coded every single text unit in precisely the same way, then our overwhelming suspicion would be that
the data had been faked. The only way to investigate this problem is to arrange and analyze multiple
codings of the same manifesto using the CMP scheme, which is the central purpose of this paper.
2.2 Coding differences from category ambiguities
Just as our hypothetical French experts and chimpanzees might tear out their (body) hair trying to assign
the given categories to text units that do not neatly fit, CMP coders often report difficulties determining
precisely which of the 56-plus-uncoded categories to assign to text units.4 Hence an important source of
coder error are the ambiguities and overlap that exist in the way that some of the categories are defined.
Consider the distinction between the following categories:
“401: Free enterprise: Favorable mentions of free enterprise capitalism; superiority of indi-
vidual enterprise over state control systems...”
“402: Incentives: Need for wage and tax policies to induce enterprise...”
There is of course a difference between these category definitions but it is easy to imagine text
for which the coder’s decision as to which category is most appropriate would be a knife-edge judg-
ment, one that would be made in different ways by different coders. In contrast “501: Environmental
protection” is essentially the only CMP coding category making explicit reference to the environment,
so there is nowhere else in the scheme to allocate text units referring to the environment (a decision
that, incidentally, renders any anti-environmentalist statements uncodable by the CMP). Any text cod-
ing scheme must be viewed as a whole, taking into account overlaps and the sharpness of boundaries
between categories as well as the definitions of each category on a stand-alone basis. However, we do
expect some CMP coding categories to be more “reliable” (different coders tend to code the same text
4In the extended coding scheme developed in MPP2 to allow subcategories to be applied to manifestos from Central
and Eastern European countries plus Mexico, an additional 54 subcategories were developed, designed to be aggregated into
one of the standard 56 categories used in all countries. For the purposes of computing indexes such as rile, however, the
subcategories were not aggregated or used in any way. For these reasons and the general wish to keep the focus as simple as
possible in this paper, our analysis here is restricted to the original 56 + uncoded standard CMP categories.
7
unit into the category in question) than others (different coders do not all use the category in question
for the same text unit.) As we shall see, this is very much what we find in our coding experiments.
In practice the full 56-category coding scheme is never deployed on any one manifesto and the
norm is for far fewer than the full set of categories are used in the coding of a typical manifesto. Figure
1 characterizes the distribution of categories used across the entire set of 3,018-manifestos coded by the
CMP. The typical manifesto coding uses only 25 categories, less than half of those available. Coding
category usage ranges from startlingly mono-themed manifestos such as the 1951 Australian National
Party manifesto which consisted of 42 text units all assigned to a single category (”703: Farmers Posi-
tive”), to a maximum of 51 different categories used to code the 365 quasi-sentences found in the 1950
British Conservative Party manifesto.
[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Figure 2 shows the relative frequency, in log percentages, of text units allocated to different coding
categories, from all text units coded in the consolidated CMP dataset (excluding CEE countries and
Mexico that use the extended subcategories). The horizontal bars indicating frequency are grouped
into three categories: those that are designated as ”right” or ”left” in the additive left-right index most
commonly used by CMP consumers (called rile by the CMP), or ”neither” meaning the category is
not used in building the left-right index. To facilitate comparison among low-frequency categories, the
percentage frequencies have been transformed using base-10 logarithms, which also serves to highlight
differences in the categories used overall less than 1% of the time, shown to the left of the origin.
[FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]
2.3 From categories to scales
One response to overlapping or vague boundaries between text coding categories is to combine these,
to produce a more reliable aggregate category. In addition, what amounts to the 56-dimensional policy
space measured by the CMP manifesto codings is cumbersome to use as an operationalization of specific
models of party competition. Furthermore, as a matter of practical fact, most third-party users of CMP
policy time series data are looking for something much simpler; nearly all of them, indeed, are looking
for party positions on a simple left-right scale.
In response to these interlocking demands, the CMP is best known for its left-right “rile” scale,
which the CMP itself calls its “crowning achievement” (Budge et al. 2001, 19). This is a simple additive
index based aggregating 13 coding categories seen as being on the “left”, 13 seen as being on the “right”,
8
and subtracting the percentage of aggregated left categories from those of the right. The theoretical range
of this scale is thus [-100, 100], although in practice nearly all rile scores span the scale’s middle range
of [-50, 50]. In practical terms, therefore, two different types of classification are classification into
the three aggregate categories of left, right, or neither. The “rile” scale is thought to be more reliable
than any single coding category, since it is likely that most of the stochastic variation in text coding
will result from different coders allocating the same text unit to different categories on the “left” or the
“right”. From the perspective of the left-right scale that most third-party users are interested in, such
coding “errors” are in effect self-canceling.5
2.4 Strategies to maximize reliability
Previous work investigating the reliability of the CMP scales has focused on different and quite distinct
aspects of the issue. The CMP’s approach to the coding reliability issue is to focus on procedures of
coding used in data production (Klingemann et al. 2006, 107). Possible problems of coding error that
we discuss below are approached by “setting and enforcing central standards on coders” by getting the
coders to conform to a particular English-language standard and also by constant communication and
interaction with the supervisor in Berlin (Volkens 2001b, 94). The focus thereby is on coder “training”
(see Volkens 2001a, 37-40). Specifically the CMP has done this by setting out to train all CMP coders to
code the same two manifestos in the same way as a CMP “gold standard” coding that is taken to reflect
a “certain truth” about the policy positions expressed in those manifestos.
The CMP has invested great effort into improving the quality of its manifesto coding. Based
on the first evaluation of test results, a new version of coding instructions was produced (Volkens 2007,
118).6 The revised instructions draw particular attention to three specific ambiguities in the CMP coding
scheme affecting coding reliability: when no category seems to apply to the quasi-sentence, when more
5This problem, which the CMP has termed “coding seepage” (Klingemann et al. 2006, 112), is thought to mainly take
place in between categories within the same aggregate categories. Analysis of coding decisions conducted by the CMP team
suggests several categories prone to systematic misclassification. Thus coding categories that have been identified as “seeping”
codes (in brackets): Per101 (Per104), Per302 (Per303 and Per305), Per504 (Per503), Per601 (Per606), Per603 (Per605 and
Per606), Per607 (Per705 and Per706); Per102 (Per103), Per105 (Per106 and Per107), Per505 (Per303), Per507 (Per303),
Per702 (Per704), Per412 (Per403 and Per413), Per409 (Per404). (Klingemann et al. 2006, Table 6.1:114) Earlier investigation
also identified per408 (per410) and per402 (per703) (Volkens 2001a, 38). The majority of “seepage”-prone categories belong
to the same aggregate scales, however, prompting the CMP to recommend their “own preferred strategy” of using the aggregate
scores to limit the effect of single category misclassifications. Because the components of the rile index “combine closely
related categories, the coding errors created by ambiguity between these are eliminated. The overall measures are thus more
stable and reliable than any one of their components” (Klingemann et al. 2006, 115). Other, lesser-used combined scale
categories are “planeco,” “markeco,” and “welfare,” representing the orientation towards a planned economy (403+404+412),
a market economy (401+414), and the state provision for welfare (503+504) respectively. (See the Appendix for details.)
6Hearl (2001) investigated possible coding differences following the structural change that happened in 1983 with the
transition to the CMP from the original MRG set up. He finds no evidence of methodological error across that “fault line” with
comparable analyses producing the same results in the subsample before 1983 and dataset as a whole.
9
than one category seems to apply, and when the statement in the quasi-sentence is unclear (Klingemann
et al. 2006, 170). Several solutions to these problems are offered in the coding manual. When no cate-
gory seems to apply the quasi-sentence may be marked as uncodable, with categories used seldom being
the most difficult to code (Klingemann et al. 2006, 170). When more than one category seems to apply
the manual offers eight decision rules ranging from re-reading the categories description, identifying
connecting sentences, creating subcategories, checking section headings as cues to more explicit rules
that specific categories should be chosen ahead of more general categories (e.g. per305 “political au-
thority” and per408 “general economic goals”). When the statement seems unclear the coder is advised
to seek cues from the context and/or contact the supervisor in Berlin.
Other investigations of reliability have specifically targeted possible error in the the aggregated
indexes, namely “rile.” McDonald & Mendes (2001) and Klingemann et al. (2006, Chapter 5) focus on
the issue of measurement error in the “rile” scale as an approach to assessing reliability. Exploiting the
panel structure of the data set and using the Heise (1969) measurement model, the authors claim to be
able to sift out measurement error from real change. The results show that under some pretty strong
theoretical assumptions and assumptions about the latent reliability structure, “rile” is effectively very
close to being perfect (Klingemann et al. 2006, 103). Such tests focus on very different issues from
those of stability and reproducablity faced here, however, where our primary concern is whether coders
can reliably implement the CMP coding instructions without serious misclassification errors.
3 A Framework for Stochastic Misclassification of Text Categories
Misclassification is a central concern in many fields, particularly in medicine where “coding errors” can
mean the difference between avoiding an unnecessary, costly, and invasive procedure and dying from
cancer. In this view, each unit (or “subject”) belongs to some objectively “true” category, although
our coders (or “raters”) can only approximate this true category by assigning it a category according to
their best judgment. The difference between the true and assigned category is misclassification, and this
misclassification, to the extent that its realization differs between coders, will reduce reliability of the
coding procedure. Note that while we take the position that there is indeed a “true” category to which
each sentence belongs—even if no human coders can agree on precisely what this is—reliability as we
have defined above it depends only on coder agreement, not on coder adherence to some perfect (and
possibly unknowable) standard. Because the entire foundation of the CMP approach is that each text unit
can be assigned to either a given category or declared “uncoded,” however, this implies the existence of
10
a “true” coding, and all evidence so far uncovered points to coders making stochastic misclassifications
roughly around these true categories. Without getting into the ultimately metaphysical questions about
what proportion of gold to pure brass exists in the CMP’s notion of a gold standard, therefore, we the
existence of such a standard as given and proceed on that basis.
Our discussion here follows the framework of Kuha & Skinner (1997) and Bross (1954). In formal
terms, let the true categories of each text unit i be represented by Ai, whose values are well-defined and
fixed, but classified with error as A∗
i . Misclassification occurs through a stochastic process
Pr(A∗
i = j|Ai = k) = θ jk (1)
where j, k= 1, . . . , m for m possible (nominal) classification categories. The key to this process is the
parameter θ jk which may be viewed as the proportion of population units in the true category k that
would be represented by coders as category j. These parameters θ jk form a misclassification matrix Θ
of dimensions m × m whose elements are all non-negative and whose columns sum to one.
  θ11 θ12
θ21 θ22
  =
  
β 1− α
1− β α
   (2)
If our coding scheme were binary, as in the Sarkozy example, then the resulting 2 × 2-dimension
Θ can be decomposed into two characteristics commonly known in the medical literature (see e.g. King
& Lu 2008, J. & Gladen 1978) as sensitivity and specificity. Sensitivity is represented by α, and refers
to Pr(A∗
i = k|Ai = k), or in the Sarkozy example, the probability that a sentence coded as “left” is really
“left”, or is coded as “right” when really “right”. In the language of hypothesis testing, (1− α) will be
familiar the probability of a Type I error, the probability of rejecting a null hypothesis when it is really
true. Specificity, on the other hand—represented by β—refers to Pr(A∗
i ̸= k|Ai = k), the probability that
a sentence is classified as “right” when it is really “left” or vice-versa. In the language of hypothesis
testing, specificity refers to the risk of committing Type II error, or failing to reject a null hypothesis
when the alternative hypothesis in fact true.
If a coding scheme could be applied to text units perfectly, then Θ would consist of an m ×
m identity matrix. To the extent that there are off-diagonals in Θ, however, random misclassification
will reduce reliability, and then these off-diagonals are non-symmetric, the result will be systematic
misclassification or bias. We can estimate this degree of bias by examining the effect of misclassification
on our estimates of manifesto categories. Following Kuha & Skinner (1997), for a text, let NA
j be the
11
number of text units for which Ai = j, and let PA
j= NA
j /N, where N= ∑ NA is the total number of
text units. Our objective is to estimate the vector PA = (PA
1 , . . . , PA
m)′ of proportions of each category of
manifesto code from the coding scheme, for our given text—in other words, the CMP’s “per” variables.
With misclassification, PA will be generally estimated by some vector pA∗ = (pA
1 , . . . , pA
m)′ where
pA∗
= ∑ I(A∗
i = j) and I(·) denotes the indicator function. It follows from (1) that
E[I(A∗
i = j)] =
m
∑
k=1
θ jkI(Ai = k) (3)
so that the vector of “true” counts pA in each coding category is related to what we expect to observe by
E(pA∗) = ΘpA (4)
The bias from misclassification will then be expressible as
Bias(pA∗) = (Θ− I)PA (5)
where I is the m × m identity matrix. Our task in assessing misclassification and the unreliability of the
coding procedure that follows, therefore, is to obtain estimates of the misclassification matrix Θ. To the
extent that this misclassification matrix differs from identity, categories are likely to be misclassified,
yielding unreliable and potentially biased estimates of the content of the texts being coded.
4 An Experiment to Assess Coder Agreement
4.1 Methods and Data
Our method for evaluating misclassification and reliability in the CMP coding procedure was to perform
a simple experiment: to see how much agreement could be obtained by multiple coders applying the
CMP scheme to the same texts. Our experiment employed two texts, both taken from the “Manifesto
Coding Instructions” provided in Appendix II to Klingemann et al. (2006). Apart from detailed instruc-
tions for coders, Appendix II also contains two fully coded sample texts designed to serve as examples.
Using these two texts several key advantages. First, each text had already been “officially” parsed into
quasi-sentences by the CMP, meaning that we could take the unitization step as given, and focus in the
experiment only on the assignment of codes to each quasi-sentence. Second, because each text was also
12
officially coded by the CMP, the CMP codings serve as a “gold standard” for comparing to tester cod-
ings. Finally, since these two texts had been chosen for their clarity and codeability to be instructional
examples, they also made good texts for comparing tester agreement in our experiments.
The first sample text is an extract from the UK The Liberal/SDP Alliance 1983 manifesto. The
text consists of 107 text units coded by the CMP into 19 categories. The second sample text is an
extract from New Zealand National Party 1972 manifesto, containing 72 text units coded by the CMP
into 11 categories. The National Party manifesto text contains only one unique code not present in
The Liberal/SDP Alliance manifesto text. Overall, therefore, our reliability experiment could effectively
estimate coder bias and misclassification in relation only to 20 out of 57 available categories, although
these categories were among the most common of those found in most manifestos (see Figure 2).
Our test was set up on a dedicated web page containing digitized versions of sample texts, already
divided into quasi-sentences. Each page also contained detailed instructions adapted directly from from
“Manifesto Coding Instructions” in Appendix II to Klingemann et al. (2006). Coders were asked to
select for each text unit an appropriate category from a scroll-down menu. We also collected some
minimal information on coder identifiers and previous experience in coding manifestos. Only completed
manifestos could be submitted into the system. Going for a mix of experience and youth we sent out
invitations to participate in our experiment to the majority of trained CMP coders7 and a selection of
usual suspects: staff and postgraduates at several European and North American universities. We ended
up with a list of 172 names with active emails who were randomly assigned to one of the two test
documents.
Our response set actually consisted of 39 subjects, but some of these results were discarded. To
be as fair as possible to the CMP, we arbitrarily discarded the bottom fourth of test coders in terms of
their reliability, while dropping none from the top. Overall, the New Zealand manifesto was completed
by 12 coders and the UK manifesto by 17. The coders whose results are reported here had a mixture
of prior experience with coding manifestos using the CMP scheme, without any discernible pattern of
more experienced coders being near the top.
7Andrea Volkens has kindly provided us with a list of names of 84 CMP coders of which 60% were matched with email
addresses. We also used publicly available e-mail addresses of coders trained by the CMP for a separate Euromanifestos
Project. (See W¨ ust, A. and A. Volkens, Euromanifesto Coding Instructions, MZES.)
13
4.2 Methods of Assessing Agreement
Previous analysis of inter-coder variation, coder bias, and misclassification can only be characterized
as limited. The extent to which coder training was successful was measured by correlating percentages
coded into each category by a given trainee with percentages coded into the same categories in the
CMP “gold standard” coding a test manifesto. Depending on which test we are talking about, these
correlations range from 0.70 to 0.80. For 23 coders that were trained from the the second version of
coding manual, their average correlation with the “gold standard” was reported to be 0.83. Of these
coders fourteen were new hires taking the test for the first time. Their average correlation with the
master copy is 0.82. Nine coders on the second contract took the test again with results for this group
going up from 0.70 in the first round to 0.85 in the second round (Volkens 2007, 118). Klingemann
et al.(2006, 107) report that coders on another contract retaking the test showed an average correlation
coefficient of 0.88. These reported results are collected in Table 1.
[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Several serious issues with these reported results become immediately apparent to anyone who
ever used the CMP data. The key issue in reliability tests taken by the CMP coders is whether they agree
on unitization and categorization of text units with the “gold standard”. There is a clear distinction,
however, between measuring agreement and measuring association. Strong association is required for
strong agreement, but the reverse is not true (Agresti 1996, 243).
The association measure reported by the CMP is the Pearson product-moment correlation that
measures the degree of linear trend between two (at least) ordinal variables: the degree to which values
of one variable predict values of the other variable. Measures of agreement, on the other hand, gauge
the extent to which one variable equals the other. If a coder consistently miscategorizes quasi-sentence
of a particular type, then association with the “gold standard” will be strong even though the strength of
agreement is poor. Moreover, the Pearson product-moment correlations are not applicable for nominal-
level data, which is the case in the analysis of (mis)coding of individual text units. For these reasons,
states Krippendorff (2004, 245), correlations should be avoided since “in content analysis their use is
seriously misleading”.
Another problem with the CMP’s coder reliability data concerns the issue of zero-category infla-
tion. As discussed earlier and clearly shown in Figures 1 and 2, for any given manifesto only a small
subset of the available categories tend to be used. The test manifesto used by the CMP to assess re-
liability is no exception, and since the correlation vectors from the CMP’s reliability are indexed by
14
category, this means a majority of the elements in the correlation vectors will have zeroes. The effect is
to register high correlations based not how well coders agree on applicable categories, but how well they
agree on categories that clearly do not apply (such clear agreement on the absence of any EU-category
quasi-sentences in the 1966 New Zealand training document used for the tests).
Beyond the measures of association there are standard measures of agreement that are used ex-
tensively in the literature on content analysis. One standard measure is Krippendorff’s α, which is
“the most general agreement measure with appropriate reliability interpretations in content analysis”
(Krippendorff 2004, 221). Outside the content analysis literature by far the most widely used method of
statistical analysis of agreement for categorical variables is the κ measure (Roberts 2008, 811). Hayes
and Krippendorff (2007) compare Krippendorff’s α and Fleiss’ κ and suggest that they are very similar.
We also find that in most practical contexts both measures produce essentially identical coefficients.
Both α and κ coefficients have a range from zero (perfect disagreement) to one (perfect agreement).
Both measures also take into account the fact that some agreement may occur purely by chance.
It should be noted that there are two major issues with applying any measure of agreement and
association to the CMP reliability results. First, since unitization differs between coders, as it does +/-
10% in the tests reported in Table 1, it is not clear on what, if anything, the coders are supposed to
agree on. Second, coders report only aggregate percentages for each category leaving open the question
whether coders actually agreed on codes applied to individual text units. Only by fixing the units and
analyzing agreement at the category level as in our experiment can true reliability be assessed, something
which our test controls for.
The CMP group prefers to focus on reliability of composite indicators on the basis of their per-
formance within the data set (Klingemann et al. 2006, 107). Reliability results for individual estimates
are viewed of limited importance with the emphasis placed on general tendencies and patterns (2006,
108). Although it has been declared that “the data-set as a whole is reliable” (2006, 108), we believe
that reliability can only be assessed by data that is additional to the data whose reliability is in question
(Krippendorff 2004, 212). In the case of the CMP, this means analyzing reliability data obtained through
duplication of coding exercise by several independent coders.
15
5 Results of the Coding Experiment
5.1 Inter-coder Agreement
Reliability, state Hayes & Krippendorff (2007, 78), “amounts to evaluating whether a coding instrument,
serving as common instructions to different observers of the same set of phenomena, yields the same
data within a tolerable margin of error. The key to reliability is the agreement among independent
observers.” Applied to the CMP, reliability refers to the extent that different coders, coding the same
manifesto independently, are able to agree on the categories to which each quasi-sentence belongs. In
what follows we therefore report the simplest and easiest to test indicator of the CMP coding’s reliability:
how well different test coders agreed with one another when assigning categories to each quasi-sentence.
Note that in assessing this form of reliability, we need make no reference to the master or “true” coding
at all. If we find significant coder disagreement, then we can directly conclude that misclassification is
occurring, since by necessity not every disagreeing coder can be correctly classifying each text unit.
Perfect reliability is never to be expected, but widely agreed guidelines for interpreting our pri-
mary reliability measure κ, hold 0.80 to be the threshold below which a research procedure is considered
to have an acceptable reliability. In the context of content analysis Krippendorff (2004, 241) suggests not
rely on variables with reliabilities below κ = 0.80, and to consider variables with reliabilities between
κ = 0.667 and κ = 0.80 only for drawing tentative conclusions.8
[TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]
The results of our reliability scores from test coder results are summarized in Table 2. The table
reports results for the British manifesto, the New Zealand manifesto, and the two combined. The first
column reports κ for all coders by category. In theory, each quasi-sentence could have been rated by
each coder as belonging to any one of the 56 policy categories or classified as “uncoded”, although in
practice many categories were never used by any coder (for instance there was never any question that
any of the categories might have dealt with the European Union, categories 108 and 110).
Because each category also plays a role in the definition of the CMP’s centrally important “rile”
index—being one of the 13 left or 13 right categories, or one of the 31 categories that is neither—we
also compared the “rile category” assigned by each coder to the quasi-sentences, reported in the second
column (“By RILE”) of Table 2. This allowed us to test whether reliability could be improved—as
8In a slightly more lenient set of guidelines, Fleiss (2003, 604) following Landis and Koch (1977) proposed guidelines for
interpreting the kappa statistic with values above 0.75 may be taken to represent excellent agreement beyond chance, values
below 0.40 show poor agreement beyond chance, and intermediate values represent fair to good agreement beyond chance.
16
expected by the CMP—when only this reduced set of three categories was used. By this view, two
coders assigning “403” and “404” to the same quasi-sentence would be viewed in perfect agreement,
since both of these categories are classified as “left” in the rile scale.
Finally, for the categories that the CMP’s master coding identified as being present in the test
manifestos, we are also able to report individual κ statistics for the reliability of each category. These
figures are shown in the bottom part of Table 2, indicating how well different coders could agree on
quasi-sentences being designated as specific categories, by category. The results are broadly consistent
with the summary results, although several exceptionally unreliable categories stand out. From the left
side of the “rile” scale, “202: Democracy Positive” is extremely poor, with κ = 0.18, as are “701: Labour
Groups: Positive” and “Economic Planning: Positive”. On the Right, “605: Law and Order: Positive”
and especially “305: Political Authority: Positive” are flagged by our experiment as being extremely
unreliable. In general, categories identifying broad objectives such as “economic goals” seem to be very
highly prone to inter-coder disagreement when it comes to assigning them to specific text units.
Overall, these results show that regardless of whether coders are compared in the full category
tests or on the reduced three-fold “rile” classification, rater agreement is very poor by conventional
standards: 0.35-.36 for the British manifesto test, and 0.40-0.47 for the New Zealand test. The RILE test
showed no differences for the British text, but was slightly higher in the New Zealand test. When both
sets of results were combined, the results were even lower, at 0.31-0.32. These figures are undeniable
evidence that even after receiving detailed instructions, and even when at least one-third of our test
coders have previous experience with coding manifestos for the CMP, reliability for the CMP scheme is
significantly below conventionally acceptable standards.
5.2 Coder Agreement with the Master
Another way to assess reliability is by comparing the agreement of each coder with the CMP’s master
coding, taking the master coding as a “gold standard” representing the correct set of categories. Indeed,
this is the standard benchmark applied by the CMP in previous tests of reliability (e.g. Volkens 2007,
Klingemann et al. 2006, 107). If the training process has succeeded and coders are successfully able
to apply the coding scheme to actual text units, then their agreement with the master coding should be
high. Agreement with the master coding can also be taken as a measure of the errors introduced by the
difficulty of the coding scheme.
[FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE]
17
The results of our tests were not encouraging. For the British manifesto test, the New Zealand
manifesto test, and combined tests respectively, the median κ test coders’ agreement with the master
were 0.43, 0.54, and 0.46 respectively. The best coder agreed 0.74 with the master, and the worst 0.22.
The full results are portrayed in Figure 3, separated by test. This histogram shows the frequency of
different levels of κ for coder-master agreement from the 17 and 12 coders for the British and New
Zealand texts respectively. The solid black line indicates the median results (0.42 and 0.54) from each
test. For comparison with the conventional minimum level of acceptable reliability, we have also plotted
a dashed red line indicating the conventional 0.80 cutoff for acceptable reliability. As can be clearly
seen, the main density of the distribution of results for individual coders was well below standard levels
of reliability, on both test documents.
5.3 Misclassification
Comparing the different coder’s categorizations of the same text units not only allows us to estimate
reliability, but also allows us to characterize precisely the nature of this misclassification. Using the
master codings as an external validation sample, we are able to determine for each “true” category, what
the probabilities were that test coders would assign a text unit to the correct categories versus incorrect
categories. In the earlier language of or framework for misclassification, we are able to use the empirical
57 × 57 matrix of true versus observed codings to estimate the misclassification matrix Θ jk. By Equation
(5), we know that the size of the off diagonals (or Θ− I) will determine the difference between the true
categories Ai and the observed categories A∗
i.
In order to make the misclassification matrix manageable, we have reduced the focus to the prob-
ability that individual categories will be misclassified in terms of the three-fold “rile” classification.
Looking at misclassification in this way tests the CMP assertion that errors in classification will be
“self-canceling,” and also focuses attention on important errors, such as whether a category that is really
“left” will be classified as one which is considered “right” in the CMP’s “rile” scale, and vice-versa.
Because the “rile” index—as are all other quantities in the CMP dataset—are considered as proportions
of all text units, we also consider misclassifications into the “Other” category that is neither left nor
right.
Full misclassification probabilities are reported in the Appendix, for each CMP coding category.
Categories are sorted so that the 13 “rile-left” categories are listed first, the 13 “rile-right” categories
second, followed by the “rile-other” categories. The probability that an individual policy category will
18
be classified as belonging to its own “rile” classification are highlighted in boldface. For quasi-sentences
that really belong to “202: Democracy: Positive” for instance—a relative high-frequency category at
3.55% of all CMP quasi-sentences in the combined dataset—the probability is only 0.50 from our tests
that it will be assigned a CMP code that is one of the 13 “rile-left” categories. The probability is almost
even (0.47) that it will be coded as a category that is not part of the “rile” index, and just 0.03 that it will
coded as a “rile-right” category. Similar interpretations can be made for each of the other CMP coding
categories listed in the Appendix. (The limited set of categories in our test documents meant that we
could only report misclassification probabilities for the 22 categories identified by the CMP’s Master
coding.)
[TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]
Table 3 provides the most reduced summary of this misclassification, according to a 3 × 3 table.
The coders from our two tests provided a total of 1,668 text unit classifications, which we could identify
from the CMP’s master coding as belonging to a left, right, or neither “rile” category. Comparing these
to the rile categories of the coding category that our testers identified, we see significant frequencies in
the off-diagonal cells. “Left” text units in particular were prone to misclassification, as 0.35 or 35% of
the time these were assigned a category that was not in the “rile” scale. Conversely, about 19% of the
text units that were not in a category found in the “rile” scheme were classifies instead as “left”. Overall,
the highest diagonal proportion was just .70, indicating that 30% or more of the quasi-sentences were
classified into a wrong “rile” category.
[FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE]
A graphical summary of the misclassification probabilities from the Appendix is given in Figure
4, which shows the misclassification for each coding category in our tests, by the proportions assigned
by coders. The dashed red lines partition the categories into those that are really “rile-left”, “rile-right”,
and “rile-other”; each vertical bar is sized with its width proportional to the frequency of that category
from our tests. Actual classification into left is medium gray, right is dark gray, and none is light gray.
In the absence of misclassification, all bars in each division (true left, right, or other) would be the same
shade, which they are clearly not.
[FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE]
Another way to characterize the misclassification, as well as to single out visually the worst cat-
egories from the standpoint of misclassification, is to use a ternary plot. Figure 5 plots each category
according to its probability of (mis)classification into the three-fold rile set. The categories that are truly
19
left are in red, right in blue, and other in gray. In addition, the mean misclassification probabilities for
each of the three categories are shown as points with a circle (these correspond to the proportions in
Table 3.) If no misclassification existed, then all categories of the same color would be clustered in
the corners of the triangle, which as can be clearly seen does not happen. The worst categories from
a misclassification standpoint are located the furthest from the corners. Categories 305 and 404 in the
middle, for instance, are severely misclassified—confirming the probabilities reported in the Appendix.
As discussed previously, category 202 is also shown as being almost evenly split between left and other,
although its probability of being assigned a “right” category is almost nil.9
6 Demonstrating the Effects of Misclassification
We know from just the reduced 3× “rile” misclassification matrix (estimated in Table 3) that the prob-
ability is 30% or more that a text unit will be assigned the wrong left-right category. The question for
practical purposes is: just how badly will this affect our resulting estimates?
To answer this question we use simulation of the type of misclassification identified in our results
above. By simulating the effect of stochastic misclassification on a range of “rile” values at different
levels of reliability, we can assess the degree of error, both systematic and non-systematic, that are likely
to be present in the CMP’s reported rile estimates. From the combined CMP dataset, we know that the
population proportions of the “rile” left, right, and neither text units are roughly 0.25, 0.25, and 0.50
respectively. Our range of “rile” therefore fixes the other category at 0.50 and lets the other frequencies
vary so that we can observe “rile” values from -50 to +50, once again a range taken from the empirical
range in the combined CMP dataset.10
[FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE]
The results of the simulated misclassification is shown in Figure 6. Here we have manually
manipulated the misclassification matrix to be symmetric and to produce reliabilities of (reading from
top left to right) κ = 0.90, 0.80, 0.70, 0.60, and 0.50. The last panel (lower left) shows the effect of
simulating error using the misclassification probabilities from Table 3, and having a median reliability
of 0.47. A faint cross-hair indicates the origin, and a dashed line shows the identity point at which
9We hope to add some dashed lines in a future version of this plot to aid interpretation, but for now we briefly mention how
to read these plots: you go from 0 to 1 on each axis and branch to the left on the grid lines. So 202 is .5 for left, .47 for Other,
and .03 for right.
10Simulations here were performed 8 times each for even-valued “true” rile values ranging from -50 to 50. Misclassification
was generated using the misclass() function from the R simex 1.2 package. A tiny amount of jitter has been added to the
x-axis values in the plots.
20
A∗
i = Ai. Finally, the red line shows the least-squares slope.
Two patterns clearly emerge from our simulation of misclassification. First, even at relatively
high levels of reliability, misclassification adds significant noise to the resulting rile estimates, meaning
that any individual realization of the rile index is likely to contain a significant degree of random error.
Because “rile” is most commonly used as an explanatory variable in political science model—in fact
this is the single most common usage of the CMP dataset by far—this means that such models are
likely to have biased estimates (see Benoit, Laver & Mikhaylov (2007) for a fuller discussion). Second,
all of the results tilt the observed values away from the identity line, making it flatter, and causing a
centrist bias in the estimated rile values even when the misclassification matrix is strictly symmetric.
The reason is quite general: the more the true value consists of any single category, the greater the
tendency of misclassification to dilute this category. (At the extreme of being, for instance, pure left,
any misclassification can only move the estimate away from this extreme.) At the levels of reliability
indicated by our tests—call it 0.50—this bias is quite severe, cutting the estimate of a “true” rile value
of -50 or 50 almost in half. The effect on estimates when rile is used as an explanatory variables is to to
compact the range of the variable, further afflicting regression coefficients with attenuation bias.
7 Conclusions
We know with absolute certainty, from information published by the CMP itself and summarized in
1, that CMP coders disagree with CMP master codings when assigning text units to CMP coding cat-
egories. Since different coders all have different correlations with the CMP master codings, we also
know with absolute certainty that different CMP coders disagree with each other when coding the mas-
ter documents. In this paper, we characterize this disagreement as stochastic coding error and set out
to derive estimates of the scale of this. This is crucially important since each point in the widely used
CMP time series is based on a single coding by a human coder and comes with no estimate of associated
error. Before we can draw statistically valid inferences from these data, however, we need estimates of
the error associated with their generation.
Table 2 summarizes our findings on the broad scope of the stochastic error arising from multiple
independent human interpretative codings of the master documents. Bearing in mind that the minimum
standard conventionally deemed acceptable for the reliability coefficients reported in Table 2 is 0.8, the
coefficients we find are worryingly low, almost all in the range [0.3, 0.5]. From this we infer that,
had multiple independent human coders indeed been used to code every document in the CMP dataset,
21
then the inter reliability of these codings would be unacceptably low. While this has previously been
suspected on common sense grounds, it has not previously been demonstrated in a systematic way by
analyzing multiple codings of the same document using the CMP coding scheme.
We also found that some categories in the CMP scheme are much more susceptible to coding error
than others. Findings on this are summarized in Figure 4 and given in more detail in the Appendix. We
see for example that CMP coding categories “305: Political authority” and “404: economic planning:
positive” generate coding errors on a very frequent basis. More worryingly for users of the CMP left
right scale, they often generate coding errors that assign text units “master coded” as right (305) or left
(404) to a coding category on the “wrong” side of the left right scale. This in turn means that problems
arising from coding error are not solved by using the CMPs aggregate “left” and “right” categories, or
the additive scale constructed from these.
The results we report above imply that the effect of coder misclassification is to add considerable
noise to existing CMP estimates, substantially more than estimated to arise from either the text gen-
eration process (described in Benoit, Laver & Mikhaylov 2007) or of coder differences in unitization,
estimated at +/-10%. In addition, the coder misclassification, by coding as “left” what should be “right”
and vice versa, causes a centrist bias as a result of which extreme positions tend to be coded as more cen-
trist than they “really” are. The additional noise, plus the bias caused by misclassifications towards the
middle, are likely to cause additional attenuation bias of estimated causal effects when CMP quantities,
especially “rile”, are used as covariates in regression models.
The coding experiments we report above reinforce in a fairly precise way the conclusion that the
CMP data, based on human interpretative coding of party manifestos, are very noisy, and give us some
sense of the scale of this noise. These results strongly indicate further systematic work on this important
matter, since our tentative conclusions in this paper are based on limited multiple codings of only two
English-language manifestos. We used the master documents coded by the CMP in this limited exercise
because we wanted to have some sense of how the multiple codings we generated compare with the
CMPs own view of the “true and certain” position of each document. What is clearly now indicated,
however, is a project that would procure multiple independent codings of a much larger sample of
CMP documents, for which no master coding exists, to allow more confident conclusions to be drawn
about the extent of unsystematic inter-coder (un)reliability and the biasing effects of systematic coder
misclassification. The work we report above establishes a strong prima facie case that this is a problem
to be taken very seriously indeed by third-party users of the CMPs estimates of time-series of party
policy positions.
22
References
Agresti, A. 1996. An introduction to categorical data analysis. Wiley New York.
Benoit, Kenneth, Michael Laver & Slava Mikhaylov. 2007. “Estimating Party Policy Positions with
Uncertainty Based on Manifesto Codings.” Presented at the 2007 Annual Meeting of the American
Political Science Association, Hyatt Regency and Sheraton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, August
30–September 2, 2007.
Bross, I. 1954. “Misclassification in 2 × 2 Tables.” Biometrics 10:488–495.
Budge, Ian, Hans-Dieter Klingemann, Andrea Volkens, Judith Bara & Eric Tanenbaum. 2001. Mapping
Policy Preferences: Estimates for Parties, Electors, and Governments 1945–1998. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Fleiss, Joseph L., B. Levin & M.C. Paik. 2003. Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions. 3 ed.
New York: John Wiley.
Hayes, A.F. & K. Krippendorff. 2007. “Answering the Call for a Standard Reliability Measure for
Coding Data.” COMMUNICATION METHODS AND MEASURES 1(1):77.
Hearl, Derek. 2001. Checking the Party Policy Estimates: Reliability. In Mapping Policy Preferences:
Estimates for Parties, Electors, and Governments 1945–1998, ed. Ian Budge, Hans-Dieter Klinge-
mann, Andrea Volkens, Judith Bara & Eric Tanenbaum. Oxford University Press.
Heise, D.R. 1969. “Separating Reliability and Stability in Test-Retest Correlation.” American Sociolog-
ical Review 34(1):93–101.
J., Rogan W. & B. Gladen. 1978. “Estimating Prevalence from the Results of a Screening Test.” Ameri-
can Journal of Epidemiology 107:71–76.
King, Gary & Ying Lu. 2008. “Verbal Autopsy Methods with Multiple Causes.” Statistical Science 23(1,
February).
Klingemann, Hans-Dieter, Andrea Volkens, Judith Bara, Ian Budge & Michael McDonald. 2006. Map-
ping Policy Preferences II: Estimates for Parties, Electors, and Governments in Eastern Europe,
European Union and OECD 1990-2003. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
23
Krippendorff, Klaus. 2004. Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology. 2nd ed. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kuha, Jouni & Chris Skinner. 1997. Categorical Data Analysis and Misclassification. In Survey Mea-
surement and Process Quality. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Landis, J.R. & G.G. Koch. 1977. “The Measurement of Observer Agreement for Categorical Data.”
Biometrics 33(1):159–174.
Laver, Michael & John Garry. 2000. “Estimating Policy Positions from Political Texts.” American
Journal of Political Science 44(3):619–634.
Laver, Michael, Kenneth Benoit & John Garry. 2003. “Estimating the policy positions of political actors
using words as data.” American Political Science Review 97(2):311–331.
McDonald, Michael & Silvia Mendes. 2001. Checking the Party Policy Estimates: Convergent Validity.
In Mapping Policy Preferences: Estimates for Parties, Electors, and Governments 1945–1998, ed.
Ian Budge, Hans-Dieter Klingemann, Andrea Volkens, Judith Bara & Eric Tanenbaum. Oxford
University Press.
Roberts, Chris. 2008. “Modelling patterns of agreement for nominal scales.” Statistics in Medicine
27(6):810–830.
Slapin, Jonathan & Sven-Oliver Proksch. 2007. “A Scaling Model for Estimating Time-Series Policy
Positions from Texts.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwest Political Science
Association, April 12.
Volkens, Andrea. 2001a. Manifesto Research Since 1979. From Reliability to Validity. In Estimating
the Policy Positions of Political Actors, ed. Michael Laver. London: Routledge pp. 33–49.
Volkens, Andrea. 2001b. Quantifying the Election Programmes: Coding Procedures and Controls.
In Mapping Policy Preferences: Parties, Electors and Governments: 1945-1998: Estimates for
Parties, Electors and Governments 1945-1998, ed. Ian Budge, Hans-Dieter Klingemann, Andrea
Volkens, Judith Bara, Eric Tannenbaum, Richard Fording, Derek Hearl, Hee Min Kim, Michael
McDonald & Silvia Mendes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Volkens, Andrea. 2007. “Strengths and Weaknesses of Approaches to Measuring Policy Positions of
Parties.” Electoral Studies 26(1):108–120.
24
Test description Mean Correlation N Reference
Training coders’ solutions with master 0.72 39 Volkens (2001a, 39)
Training coders’ second attempt with master 0.88 9 MPP2 (2006, 107)
All pairs of coders 0.71 39 Volkens (2001a, 39)
Coders trained on 2nd edition of manual 0.83 23 Volkens (2007, 118)
First time coders 0.82 14 Volkens (2007, 118)
First test of coders taking second contract 0.70 9 Volkens (2007, 118)
Second test of coders taking second contract 0.85 9 Volkens (2007, 118)
Table 1: Coder reliability test results reported by CMP. Sources are (Klingemann et al. 2006; Volkens
2001a, 2007); figures reported are Pearson’s R for the aggregate percentage measured across 56 coding
categories for the test document found in MPP2, pp181–186.
25
Reliability Test Fleiss’s κ
By Category By RILE
British Manifesto Test 0.35 0.36
(107 text units, 17 coders)
New Zealand Manifesto Test 0.40 0.47
(72 text units, 12 coders)
Combined Test Results 0.31 0.32
(144 text units, 24 coders)
Combined Results by Category:
504: Welfare State Expansion: Positive (L) 0.50
506: Education Expansion: Positive (L) 0.46
403: Market Regulation: Positive (L) 0.29
202: Democracy: Positive (L) 0.18
701: Labour Groups: Positive (L) 0.14
404: Economic Planning: Positive (L) 0.05
402: Incentives: Positive (R) 0.46
414: Economic Orthodoxy: Positive (R) 0.46
606: Social Harmony: Positive (R) 0.44
605: Law and Order: Positive (R) 0.13
305: Political Authority: Positive (R) 0.10
703: Farmers: Positive 0.82
503: Social Justice: Positive 0.35
411: Technology and Infrastructure: Positive 0.34
706: Non-economic Demographic Groups: Positive 0.29
405: Corporatism: Positive 0.21
410: Productivity: Positive 0.17
408: Economic Goals 0.13
000: Uncoded 0.11
303: Govt’l and Admin. Efficiency: Positive 0.02
Table 2: Reliability Results from Coder Tests. The (L) or (R) desginates whether a CMP category was
part of the “rile” left or right definition, respectively.
26
Classified rile
Left Right None
Left 430 41 254 725
True rile 0.59 0.06 0.35
Right 100 650 193 943
0.11 0.69 0.20
None 188 115 712 1,015
0.19 0.11 0.70
718 806 1,159 1,668
Table 3: Misclassification matrix for true versus observed rile. The top figure in each cell is the raw
count; the bottom figure is the row proportion. The figures are empirically computed from combined
British and New Zealand manifesto tests.
27
Density
0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030
median = 25
1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55
Number of Categories Used in Each Manifesto Coding
Figure 1: Category Usage Profile for the Combined CMP Dataset, n=3,018 manifestos.
28
n305
n201
n605
n402
n414
n401
n606
n603
n104
n601
n203
n505
n407
n504
n506
n202
n107
n701
n403
n404
n106
n105
n412
n413
n103
n406
n411
n501
Uncoded
n303
n706
n503
n703
n301
n502
n408
n410
n108
n705
n704
n607
n304
n101
n416
n110
n109
n604
n405
n204
n102
n608
n602
n409
n302
n702
n415
n507
CMP Right
CMP Left
Neither
−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
log10(Total Percentage Occurence of Coding Category) from CMP Dataset
Figure 2: Category Frequency Across All manifestos, as log10 percentage.
29
Britain
New Zealand
Frequency
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Frequency
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Cohen's Kappa Tester v. Master (n=17)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Cohen's Kappa Tester v. Master (n=12)
Figure 3: Summary of Coder Reliabilities Compared to Master, Cohen’s κ. The dashed red line indicates
the conventional lower bound as to what is considered “reliable” in interpretations of Cohen’s κ. The
solid black lines are the median value of κ from all the coders completing the tests.
30
31
Rile Category Classification by Test Coders
left right none
True Left Category True Right Category True None Category
202 403 504 506 701 305 402 414 605 606 303 408 410 411 503 703 706
True Category
Figure 4: Empirically computed misclassification matrix, True Categories by Observed rile Categories of Left, Right, or Other.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0 1
605
402
414
606
●
●
Coded.Left
Coded.Right
305
0
404
403
701
408 410
503 703
●
●
●
●
504
1
506
202
411
303
706
405
0
0 Coded.Other 1
Figure 5: Misclassification into Left, Right, or Other by coding category, from experiments. The dark
circles in hollow points represent the misclassification for the 3 × 3 left-right-other misclassification
matrix. Each number plotted identifies the probability of this category being coded as a left, right,
or other category, where the red numbers are really left, the blue numbers really right, and the gray
numbers really other categories. If no misclassification existed, all numbers would cluster together into
their respective corners, which clearly does not happen.
32
−40 −20 0 20 40
−40 −20 0 20 40
Reliability of kappa=.90, symmetric errors
True "rile" score
"rile" score with misclassification
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
−40 −20 0 20 40
−40 −20 0 20 40
Reliability of kappa=.80, symmetric errors
True "rile" score
"rile" score with misclassification
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
−40 −20 0 20 40
−40 −20 0 20 40
Reliability of kappa=.70, symmetric errors
True "rile" score
"rile" score with misclassification
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
−40 −20 0 20 40
−40 −20 0 20 40
Reliability of kappa=.60, symmetric errors
True "rile" score
"rile" score with misclassification
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
−40 −20 0 20 40
−40 −20 0 20 40
Reliability of kappa=.50, symmetric errors
True "rile" score
"rile" score with misclassification
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
−40 −20 0 20 40
−40 −20 0 20 40
Test Reliability of kappa=.47, asymmetric errors
True "rile" score
"rile" score with misclassification
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
Figure 6: Simulated Misclassification at Different Levels of κ. The misclassification matrix Θ ji is sim-
ulated from a manifesto with 50% uncoded content, for different levels of κ, except for the last panel,
which uses
ˆ
Θ ji estimated from the coding experiments. Misclassification is simulated 8 times for each
even-numbered true “rile” score from -50 to 50.
33
APPENDIX: Complete Category Listing.
Detailed information on categories, reliability, and classification probabilities from tests.
Code Description Overall Fleiss κ Pr(A∗|A) =
% RILE All RILE Left Right Other
103 Anti-Imperialism: Positive 0.38 L
105 Military: Negative 0.77 L
106 Peace: Positive 0.82 L
107 Internationalism: Positive 2.79 L
202 Democracy: Positive 3.55 L 0.18 0.07 0.50 0.03 0.47
403 Market Regulation: Positive 2.04 L 0.29 -0.03 0.75 0.12 0.14
404 Economic Planning: Positive 0.97 L 0.05 -0.05 0.18 0.35 0.47
406 412 Protectionism: Positive Controlled Economy: Positive 0.26 0.71 L
L
413 Nationalization: Positive 0.41 L
504 506 Welfare State Expansion: Positive Education Expansion: Positive 7.19 4.44 L L 0.50 0.46 0.10 0.68 n/a 0.78 0.03 0.00 0.29
0.22
701 Labour Groups: Positive 2.51 L 0.14 0.05 0.45 0.08 0.47
104 201 Military: Positive Freedom and Human Rights: Positive 1.32 2.56 R
R
203 Constitutionalism: Positve 0.59 R
305 Political Authority: Positive 3.00 R 0.10 0.14 0.24 0.44 0.32
401 Free Enterprise: Positive 1.74 R
402 Incentives: Positive 2.29 R 0.46 0.03 0.20 0.74 0.06
407 Protectionism: Negative 0.21 R
414 Economic Orthodoxy: Positive 1.91 R 0.46 0.16 0.02 0.77 0.20
505 Welfare State Limitation: Positive 0.36 R
601 National Way of Life: Positive 1.03 R
603 Traditional Morality: Positive 1.41 R
605 Law and Order: Positive 2.46 R 0.13 n/a 0.00 0.82 0.18
606 Social Harmony: Positive 1.44 R 0.44 0.24 0.03 0.71 0.26
101 Foreign Special relationships: Positive 0.77 -
102 Foreign Special relationships: Negative 0.22 -
108 European Integration: Positive 1.92 -
109 Internationalism: Negative 0.40 -
110 European Integration: Negative 0.43 -
204 301 Constitutionalism: Negative Decentralization: Positive 0.23 3.19 -
-
302 Centalization: Positive 0.16 -
303 Governmenatal and Administrative Efficiency:
Positive
4.60 - 0.02 n/a 0.47 0.00 0.53
304 Political Corruption: Negative 0.80 -
405 Corporatism: Positive 0.27 - 0.21 n/a 0.25 0.00 0.75
408 Economic Goals 2.90 - 0.13 0.02 0.16 0.16 0.68
409 Keynesian Demand Management: Positive 0.19 -
410 Productivity: Positive 2.14 - 0.17 0.12 0.01 0.16 0.83
411 Technology and Infrastructure: Positive 5.71 - 0.34 0.29 0.41 0.05 0.54
415 Marxist Analysis: Positive 0.09 -
416 Anti-Growth Economy: Positive 0.69 -
501 Environmental Protection: Positive 4.85 -
502 Culture: Positive 3.04 -
503 Social Justice: Positive 3.83 - 0.35 0.24 0.12 0.10 0.78
507 Education Limitation: Positive 0.04 -
602 National Way of Life: Negative 0.21 -
604 Traditional Morality: Negative 0.29 -
607 Multiculturalism: Positive 0.80 -
608 Multiculturalism: Negative 0.22 -
702 Labour Groups: Negative 0.12 -
703 704 Farmers: Positive Middle Class and Professional Groups: Positive 3.41 0.86 - -
0.82 0.04 0.03 0.09 0.88
705 Underprivileged Minority Groups: Positive 1.44 -
706 Non-economic Demographic Groups: Positive 000 Uncoded 4.20 - 0.29 0.11 0.17 4.79 - 0.11 0.10 0.41 0.14 0.45
0.08 0.75
34