Annika Werner, Andrea Volkens
Manifesto Coding Instructions (3. fully revised edition),
2010
1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 3
2. Selection of Parties ..................................................................................................................... 4
3. Selection of Election Programs ................................................................................................. 4
4. The Coding Procedure ................................................................................................................. 6
4.1. Quantification: The Coding Unit ............................................................................................................. 7
4.2. Classification: The Standard Coding Frame........................................................................................ 9
4.2.1 Categories with Country-Specific Meanings ................................................................................... 3
4.2.2 Subcategories for Transitional Democracies .................................................................................. 3
4.2.3 Coding Problems and Difficulties ........................................................................... 2
4.2.3.1 Problems with Unitising ....................................................................................... 2
4.2.3.2 Problems with Scoring .......................................................................................... 3
4.3 Coding Sheet .................................................................................................................................................... 8
Coding Sheet for 56 Standard Categories .................................................................................... 9
Coding Sheet for 56 Standard Categories plus Subcategories ................................................ 10
5. Coding Exercise .......................................................................................................................... 11
6. Training Test .............................................................................................................................. 20
7. Entry Test .................................................................................................................................... 26
8. Definition of Standard Categories .......................................................................................... 32
9. Definition of Subcategories ..................................................................................................... 38
10. Literature ................................................................................................................................. 44
Abstract
Since 1979, the Manifesto Research Group (MRG) has been collecting and
coding election programs with the aim of estimating policy preferences of
political parties. Detailed descriptions of the Manifesto Project can be found in
Budge et al. (1987, 2001), Laver and Budge (1992), and Klingemann et al. (1994,
2006). During the first phase of the project, while the classification scheme was
being developed, the data was collected by individual MRG members. The second
phase of the project was launched in 1989. In the context of its ‘Comparative
Manifestos Project’ (CMP), the Social Science Research Center Berlin (WZB)
provided resources for updating and expanding the MRG data. The third phase
started in 2009 when the German Science Foundation (DFG) admitted the
‘Manifesto Research on Political Representation’
project (MARPOR) to its long-
term funding infrastructure scheme to update the CMP data collection, extend it
to 75 countries up until 2021, and raise the quality of raw data as well as its
position index estimates. This handbook describes how to select the documents,
to identify the coding units, and to apply the classification scheme. Hired local
coders conduct the content analysis accordingly, under central supervision.
After a training test, an entry test serves as basis for choosing coders.
Zusammenfassung
Seit 1979 sammelt und analysiert die Manifesto Research Group (MRG)
Wahlprogramme, um politische Parteienpositionen komparativ zu messen.
Detaillierte Darstellungen des Gesamtprojekts finden sich in Budge et al. (1987,
2001), Laver/Budge (1992) und Klingemann et al. (1994, 2006). Während der
ersten Phase des Projektes wurde das Klassifikationsschema entwickelt und
jedes Gruppenmitglied brachte die Daten eines Landes ein. 1989 begann die
zweite Phase, in der das Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin für Sozialforschung (WZB)
die Vervollständigung und Erweiterung der Datensammlung ermöglichte. Die
dritte Phase wurde 2009 mit der Aufnahme von MARPOR (Manifesto Research on
Political Representation) in das langfristiges Infrastrukturprogramm der
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) eingeleitet, in dessen Rahmen die CMP
Daten aktualisiert, die Datensammlung auf 75 Länder ausgeweitet und die
Qualität der Rohdaten sowie der Positionsindizes erhöht wird. Die
Inhaltsanalysen werden von einheimischen Codern anhand des vorliegenden
Handbuches unter zentraler Aufsicht vorgenommen. Das Handbuch führt die
Coder in die Selektion der Programme, die Identifikation der Codiereinheiten
und die Anwendung des Klassifikationsschemas ein. Ein beigefügter
Trainingstest dient der Schulung von Codern, ein Eingangstest der
abschließenden Coderauswahl.
2
1. Introduction
The object of analysing election programs is to measure parties’ policy
positions preferences across countries and elections within a common
framework. Election programs are taken as indicators of the parties’ policy
preferences at a certain point in time. Therefore, election programs are
subjected to quantitative content analysis. A classification scheme was designed
to allow for the coding of all the content of election programs for the post
World-War-II period in a variety of countries.
A first version of the classification scheme was developed by David
Robertson (1976:73-75) for analysing modes of party competition in Britain and
the USA. In 1979, the ‘Manifesto Research Group’ (MRG) was constituted as a
research group of the European Consortium for Political Research (ECPR) by
scholars interested in a comparative content-analytic approach on policy
preferences of parties. During their work, the classification scheme was
extended and revised to fit additional countries.
Since 1989 the Social Science Research Centre Berlin (WZB) provides
resources for updating and expanding the MRG data set in the context of its
‘Comparative Manifestos Project’ (CMP).
In 2009 the German Science Foundation (DFG) admitted the ‘Manifesto
Research on Political Representation’ (MARPOR) project to its long-term funding
infrastructure scheme. Until 2021 the CMP data collection is updated and
extended to 75 countries including Latin America and South-East Asia.
This handbook is an introduction into the application of the coding
scheme. It provides coders who do not have the background knowledge of the
MRG-members and investigators in countries not covered by the MRG/CMP with
all the relevant information, definitions, and sources to apply the coding
scheme to their respective countries. This third version of the handbook,
updating the second version (Volkens 2002) with the considerations indicated in
Volkens, Alonso and Gómez (2009), provides further commandments, rules, and
examples to enhance the data quality by ensuring comparability between the
coders.
2. Selection of Parties
The project started at the beginning of the 1970s with the idea of
comparing parties’ programmatic strategies in Britain and the United States
during the post-World War II period (Robertson 1976). Since then, the data
collection has been continually updated for all new national elections and
extended to 29 members of the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) and all member states of the European Union (EU).
During the first phase of the Manifesto project, the coders decided which
parties to include into the coding process. The collection ought to have covered
all the significant parties which are represented in the national assembly. The
significance of parties was defined as the coalition (governmental) or blackmail
potential of a party in a given party system (Sartori 1976:121-125). Coalition
potential is defined as 1. the actual or former membership in a government or 2.
the possibility (feasibility) of becoming a government party. Blackmail potential
is defined as the party’s impact on ‘the tactics of party competition particularly
when it alters the direction of the competition - by determining a switch from
centripetal to centrifugal competition either leftward, rightward, or in both
directions - of the governing-oriented parties.’ (Sartori 1976:123) These criteria
for selection need consideration whether small parties, especially new ones like
the Green Parties, affect party competition despite their small size.
In the second phase, CMP additionally documented 23 Central and Eastern
European (CEE) party systems in the making, including the Visegrad countries
and Baltic states which all joined the EU, as well as the Balkan countries and the
successor states to the Soviet Union. All CEE parties were included that won two
or more seats in the national parliaments.
With the MARPOR project, the democratic countries of Latin America and
South-East Asia are also introduced into the database. All coders hired by
MARPOR receive a list of parties for which manifestos or their substitutes have
to be coded.
3. Selection of Election Programs
Programmatic statements are central features of parties. In party
programs, the political ideas and goals of parties are put on record. Although
only few voters actually read party programs, they are spread commonly
through the mass media.
Among the different kinds of programs which are issued in many
countries, the bases for this research are manifestos. The British label
‘manifesto’ refers to what the rest of the world dubs ‘election program,’ i.e., a
text issued by political actors on the occasion of elections in order to raise
internal and/or external support. In this manual, the term is used to define a
text with an average length of 50 pages published by a political party in order to
compete for votes in national or supra-national level elections.
4
The advantages of taking election programs as a source for identifying
political goals of parties are manifold:
1) Election programs cover a wide range of political positions and themes
and, therefore, can be seen as a ’set of key central statements of party
positions’ (Budge, Robertson, Hearl 1987:18).
2) Election programs are authoritative statements of party policies
because the programs are usually ratified in party conventions.
3) Election programs are representative statements for the whole party,
not just statements of one faction or group within the party or of
individual party members.
4) Election programs are published before every election. Thus, changes
of policy preferences of parties over time can be studied.
Nevertheless, some scholars are suspicious about election programs. They
argue that no voter ever reads a program, that election programs are mere
shopping lists to attract voters, or that they are too vaguely formulated to
assume any binding character for decision-taking of parties in parliament
(Hofferbert/Klingemann/Volkens 1995). However, the mass media communicate
the contents of programs during election campaigns and inform voters on
subsequent actions deviating from programmatic pledges. Quantitative analyses
of election programs reveal that programs usually contain quite a number of
concrete pledges and that, on average across parties, elections, countries, and
policy areas, about 70 percent of the concrete pledges of government parties are
put into effect (Rallings 1987; Thomson 2001).
While the definition of ‘manifesto’ presented above may seem
straightforward at first sight, many variations can occur across parties,
elections, countries, levels, and times. The title of a manifesto can vary
considerably, from
‘Election Program of Party X’
, ‘Program’, ‘Platform’ or ‘Action
Intentions’ to statements like ‘We will make Australia prosper’, and is a key
component of documenting the coding process. The same is true for the number
of pages. The sources of gathering the programs may be the parties themselves
and in particular their websites, special election newspapers of parties but also
regular newspapers. Furthermore, associated research and training institutes or
publications, e.g. books with collections of programs, might be sources.
Specificities are especially important in those instances, when there is
not one easily identifiable election manifesto available. Some parties issue more
than one program, e.g. one long and one short version or specific programs for
their first 100 days in office. Alliances and electoral blocks might issue one joint
program or each party may keep its own programmatic statements. Some
parties may also compete on the basis of a general program, containing long-
term goals and ideological principles of parties, instead of a specific election
programme. Should parties provide more than one version of an election
program, be it a long and a short version or a machine-readable version via the
webpage and a colourful hard-copy including many pictures, all versions need
to be collected and send to the supervisor.
In some countries parties do not distribute ideal type election programs.
The only texts available may be newspaper summaries as a condensed form of
the parties’ election pledges. In others, only reports of party spokesmen about
policy preferences and goals for the upcoming legislature may be available. In
such cases, these sources and all the available information on them need to be
collected just as carefully. In any case the ideal type of a document which
summarises authoritative statements of the party’s policy preferences for
electioneering should be retrieved if at all possible.
All users of the data strongly depend on the information they get from
the coders, which needs to be as complete as possible. Hence, Commandment
No. 1 is crucial: Document titles, sources, number of pages and all
specificities of texts and do so in a readily comprehensible way. While only
country coders as the country specialists can provide all these information,
decisions on which programs are to be selected for coding will be taken by the
supervisor based on recommendations of the coder.
Whenever there is machine-readable version of the texts available, they
should be used for the documentation and coding. In these cases, the coders only
need to send the coded text to the supervisor. If only hard copies of the
manifestos are at hand, the coding and any information on the document must
be legible in a scanned version. Furthermore, the coders need to count the codes
and fill in the coding sheet (section 4.3).
4. The Coding Procedure
Central concern of any coding procedure is the comparability of its
results. Hence, in principle, every coder should make the same decisions on the
quantification and classification of any given manifesto. Therefore, the
instructions in this handbook have to be studied thoroughly and followed to the
core. The included training test is a crucial element in the training of the coders
and provides valuable feedback to them. Thus, this test has to be taken before
the actual coding can start. Equally important is to highlight that it is not
sufficient to look at this handbook only once. Coders must read the manual
several times and try to memorize all commandments, rules, and definitions of
categories as far as possible. The more a coder can memorize the rules and
definitions, the faster the production coding will be. Thus, Commandment 2 is
to read trough the whole manual before starting any work and to memorize
commandments, rules, and definitions as far as possible.
The specific kind of internal, quantitative analysis is derived from the
question as to what ideas, policies, issues, and concerns parties stress in their
manifestos. The methods of coding are designed to be comparable over a wide
range of countries irrespective of cultural and socio-economic differences.
Therefore, a classification scheme with invariant general categories is used to
cover the total content of election programs by identifying the statements of
preference expressed in the programs. In comparative perspective, specific
issues and claims vary between parties, countries, and over time because all
party systems differ to some degree in their status quo. Therefore, not all given
6
concepts play a role everywhere all the time. And in case of such broad
comparative concepts, their definitions can never cover every possible specific
issue and claim coming up somewhere someplace.
The CMP classification scheme captures policy preferences of parties as
taken in their election programs (Budge 2001a, 2001b, 2002). Deductive
(Budge/Farlie 1977) as well as inductive considerations (Budge 1993a, 1993b)
have produced 56 Standard Categories covering all relevant policy areas and an
average of 98 percent of program contents (Volkens 2001). Each of the 56
categories sums up related issues in a way that changes over time can be
measured across parties and cross-culturally. Thus, the coding procedure
comprises a quantification (how many statements do parties make?) and a
classification (what kind of statements do parties make?) of election programs.
4.1. Quantification: The Coding Unit
The coding unit in any given program is the ‘quasi-sentence,’ defined as
an argument. An argument is the verbal expression of one political idea or
issue. In its simplest form, a sentence is the basic unit of meaning. Therefore,
punctuation is used as the most important guideline for identifying arguments.
In its shortest form, a sentence contains a subject, a verb, and an attribute or
adjective:
We want worldwide peace.
We will reduce our military forces.
Obviously, these two sentences contain two different arguments which
are easy to identify and to distinguish. But unfortunately, languages are more
complex, and it is a question of style how to express the same political ideas:
We want worldwide peace and will reduce our military forces.
In this case, the two statements are combined into one sentence but for
our purposes they should be still treated as two different arguments. Whether
parties use simple, short sentences or combine arguments into one long
sentence is largely a matter of style. Because the results of our content analysis
must be independent of style, long sentences are decomposed into ‘quasi-
sentences’ if the argument changes within the sentence. In most cases, one
sentence that covers two (or more) arguments can be easily transformed into
two (or more) quasi-sentences by repeating substantives and/or verbs as shown
by the two examples above. Thus, Commandment No. 3 defines the coding unit
as the quasi-sentence, given by a set of words containing one and only one
political argument. It stops either at the end of an argument or at a full stop
(period).
A list of arguments, sometimes marked with hyphens or dots, is treated
as if separated by full stops:
In international policy we shall take new initiatives. We will:
- promote peace;
- ban chemical weapons;
- begin discussions for the removal of nuclear bases;
- increase aid to developing countries;
- take action to protect the status of refugees.
This text contains six quasi-sentences. Two of the arguments (1. ban
chemical weapons; 2. begin discussions for the removal of nuclear bases)
express the same general idea, i.e., disarmament, but different issues in this
policy field. Because distinct policies are mentioned, two different quasi-
sentences are identified. This list of policies may be given in the following way
for which the same number of quasi-sentences is coded as for the list given
above:
In international policy we shall take new initiatives. We will promote
peace, ban chemical weapons, begin discussions for the removal of nuclear
bases, increase aid to developing countries, and take action to protect the status
of refugees.
If different issues – however short – are dealt with in the same sentence
they constitute different quasi-sentences even if they apply to the same policy
field. However, the aim of identifying coding units is NOT to cut each and every
sentence in as many quasi-sentences as there are categories or sub-categories
given, which cover a part or one word of the sentence. The goal is to identify
the overall argument in a sentence. Only unique new arguments may be cut into
quasi-sentences. The following is an example for a very long sentence.
“Now a new historical period has begun – a period in which Russia should
be cleansed from obscurantism and evil foreign and inner forces, a period of its
revival as a great superpower, strong and peaceful, and democratic, free and
prosperous, setting the whole world an example of real civilization and strong
spirituality.“(Russia, LDPR 2003)
At first sight, this sentence seems to contain arguments about peace,
democracy, freedom, prosperity and various others. However, the overall
argument here is patriotism. Accordingly, this sentence is not cut up.
These convoluted sentences are often found at the beginning and the end
of a program, when parties summarize their ideas and preferences. If this is the
case, leave the tricky parts to the end of the coding procedure. The main parts of
the programs usually provide you with ideas on how to deal with long sentences
without cutting them up into as many quasi-sentences as there are words.
8
Decision Rule No 1: Identifying Quasi- Sentences
1. Copy the respective party program into the left column of a table with 2
columns, leave the right column for the codings (see section 5). Then, 2. start
with reading the first paragraph, 3. look at each sentence of the first paragraph,
4. identify the number of arguments and transform them into (quasi-)sentences,
and 5. mark all (quasi-)sentences in the first paragraph as shown in sample
texts in section 5. Always think twice before you cut a sentence into several
quasi-sentences. Always read the sentence again and consider whether there is
a comprehensive argument that catches the meaning of those aspects that could
be considered separately.
Some parts of the manifesto, like statistics, tables of content and section
headings are not considered as text to be coded and, therefore, do not count as
quasi-sentences. Introductory remarks by party leaders are equally ignored
since the ideal-type of a manifesto is defined as authoritative statements of
parties. All the other parts of a manifesto constitute the basis of analysis. The
total number of units of analysis equals the total number of quasi-sentences
identified for the relevant text of a given manifesto.
4.2. Classification: The Standard Coding Frame
In this project three types of comparisons are possible: a) comparisons of
changes in policy preferences or in emphases over time within specific parties;
b) differences in policy preferences or in emphases across parties; and, c)
differences across countries. The basic data sought to support such comparisons
are the shares of election programs devoted to each category in a set of
standardised issue areas. Comparison requires standardisation. The Manifesto
project, after much experimentation and discussion, developed a coding system,
whereby each quasi-sentence of every election program is coded into one, and
only one, of 56 standard categories. The 56 categories are grouped into seven
major policy areas. The coding categories are designed, as far as possible, to be
comparable between parties, countries and over time.
Party manifestos, however, differ tremendously between countries,
parties, and over time. When trying to attribute specific policy issues to general
categories attention should be paid to the fact that not every category is
mentioned in every manifesto and that in the case of such broad comparative
concepts, their definitions can never cover every possible specific issue coming
up somewhere someplace. Therefore, Commandment No. 4 is to have the
handbook at hand at any time and use it whenever having the slightest
doubt about unitising or scoring. In case of any remaining doubt, check with
the supervisor. Only they can decide where an issue not covered in a definition
fits in.
Some manifestos may be easy to interpret because parties state clear
arguments, i.e., those fitting easily to given definitions of categories, in simple
sentences. Parties often repeat positions by treating lasting problems and hot
topics in some detail. In these cases, a quick check of the definition may suffice
for handling large parts of texts. But Commandment No. 5 reads ‘beware of
your expectations.’ Publicly known positions of party elites may deviate from
party program majorities. Although this difference may be small in elite-
steered parties, even these parties can state opposite positions, even within one
and the same sentence, when weighting the pros and cons of some topic.
The goal is to measure the policy preferences of parties in all policy
areas, i.e., welfare, education, economy, environment, etc. In all of these cases,
policy preferences are defined as the currently held views, either positive or
negative, on goals, positions, tasks, and issues of the political debate about
material and ideational interests and conflicts. This type of statement is covered
by the CMP Standard Classification scheme for policy preferences of national
manifestos, made up of 56 Standard Categories in three-digit codes. Some of
these 56 categories cover bipolar positions, such as (504) ‘Welfare State
Expansion’ and (505) ‘Welfare State Limitation’, others are unipolar, such as (501)
‘Environmental Protection: Positive’ because no party openly opposes these
valence issues.
10
Table 1: 56 Standard Policy Preferences in Seven Policy Domains
Domain 1: External Relations
101 Foreign Special
Relationships: Positive
102 Foreign Special
Relationships: Negative
103 Anti-Imperialism: Positive
104 Military: Positive
105 Military: Negative
106 Peace: Positive
107 Internationalism: Positive
108 European Integration:
Positive
109 Internationalism: Negative
110 European Integration:
Negative
Domain 2: Freedom and Democracy
201 Freedom and Human Rights:
Positive
202 Democracy: Positive
203 Constitutionalism: Positive
204 Constitutionalism: Negative
Domain 3: Political System
301 Decentralisation: Positive
302 Centralisation: Positive
303 Governmental and
Administrative Efficiency:
Positive
304 Political Corruption: Negative
305 Political Authority: Positive
Domain 4: Economy
401 Free Enterprise: Positive
402 Incentives: Positive
403 Market Regulation: Positive
404 Economic Planning: Positive
405 Corporatism: Positive
406 Protectionism: Positive
407 Protectionism: Negative
408 Economic Goals
409 Keynesian Demand
Management: Positive
410 Economic Growth
411 Technology and
Infrastructure: Positive
412 Controlled Economy: Positive
413 Nationalisation: Positive
414 Economic Orthodoxy:
Positive
415 Marxist Analysis: Positive
416 Anti-Growth Economy:
Positive
Domain 5: Welfare and Quality of Life
501 Environmental Protection:
Positive
502 Culture: Positive
503 Social Justice: Positive
504 Welfare State Expansion
505 Welfare State Limitation
506 Education Expansion
507 Education Limitation
Domain 6: Fabric of Society
601 National Way of Life: Positive
602 National Way of Life:
Negative
603 Traditional Morality: Positive
604 Traditional Morality:
Negative
605 Law and Order: Positive
606 Social Harmony: Positive
607 Multiculturalism: Positive
608 Multiculturalism: Negative
Domain 7: Social Groups
701 Labour Groups: Positive
702 Labour Groups: Negative
703 Agriculture: Positive
704 Middle Class and Professional
Groups: Positive
705 Minority Groups: Positive
706 Non-Economic Demographic
Groups: Positive
The coding categories are designed, as far as possible, to be comparable
between parties, countries, and over time. Policy preferences range from pledges for
action taking after the election during the upcoming legislative period to statements
of some concern over the election campaign. Parties in government also include
evaluations of their former deeds. Commandment No. 6 defines such a preference
for a policy, long- or short-term, as constituting the main emphasis of a
sentence.
After identifying the quasi-sentences in the first paragraph, the next stage of
the coding procedure is to decide which of the 56 categories of the Standard Coding
Frame a respective quasi-sentence expresses. Each category of the Standard Coding
Frame is specified by a set of typical issues and political ideas which are given in
section 8 of this handbook. Before starting the coding procedure, the coder should
read through the Standard Coding Frame and its defining ideas and issues several
times.
For the example given above, the category numbers (105) ‘Military: Negative’,
(106) Peace, (107) ‘Internationalism: Positive’ and (201) ‘Freedom and Human Rights’,
are noted down at the margin of the copied election program:
107 In international policy we shall take new initiatives. We will:
106 - promote peace;
105 - ban chemical weapons;
105 - begin discussions for the removal of nuclear bases;
107 - increase aid to developing countries;
201 - take action to protect the status of refugees.
Decision Rule No 2: Classifying the Quasi-Sentences
Read the whole of the first paragraph before you start coding the first quasi-
sentence because the context may give you hints how to code an otherwise
ambiguous argument. Look to see whether one of the 56 categories definitely
captures the sense of the first identified quasi-sentence and note down the
respective number of the category in the right column of the table or at the margin
of the page. Repeat this procedure for all the quasi-sentences of the first paragraph.
Then proceed with the next paragraph by repeating step no 1.
Not all coders may be familiar with all the terms used in this handbook or in
the manifestos. Commandment No. 7 is to check terms whenever the coder is in
doubt about the meaning of a term. In most cases, Wikipedia provides quick
explanations, comprehensive enough for most purposes.
2
4.2.1 Categories with Country-Specific Meanings
In most of the cases, the categories have clear-cut meanings which are
applicable to all countries. But some categories have country-specific contents or
require country-specific definitions. The categories (101) ‘Foreign Special Relations:
Positive’ and (102) ‘Foreign Special Relations: Negative’ are such cases. Here, the
coder has to decide in advance with which other country or countries the manifesto
country (i.e. the country he or she is coding) has a ‘special foreign relationship’; for
example, in the British case: former colonies, in the Swedish case: the rest of
Scandinavia. Equally, the category (705) ‘Minorities’ requires a definition of what
groups are considered as underprivileged in the manifesto country. The specific
content of these categories must be spelled out as notes in a coding protocol. Thus,
Commandment 8 reads: Note down definitions for all country-specific categories
in a coding protocol.
The coding has to be done in as uniform a way as possible. For comparative
reasons, the greatest possible standardisation has to be achieved. Therefore, the
coder must note down every coding decision he or she made if the procedure is not
particularly mentioned in this handbook.
4.2.2 Subcategories for Transitional Democracies
Some quasi-sentences may contain country-specific issues which are not
particularly mentioned in the definition of the category but can nonetheless be
subsumed under it. Other quasi-sentences may have a country-specific bias too
strong to be subsumed under one of the 56 Standard Categories. For these quasi-
sentences a new subcategory may be developed to capture the content of these
otherwise uncodable sentences. Subcategories are divisions of the Standard
Categories for analysing some details that are otherwise hidden or merged in the
broader categories. They can be attached to standard categories without destroying
the overall comparability as long as they are subsumed under and can be aggregated
into one of the standard categories. The typical three-digit code of the Standard
Manifesto Coding Scheme takes on a four-digit structure in the subcategory. The last
digit is telling us that we are dealing with a subcategory. The precedent three-digits
are just the same as those of the standard categories. Subcategories must always be
nested into the 56 Standard Categories so that they can be aggregated up to one of
the 56 Standard Categories. For instance 1011 is nested into 101, 2011 is nested into
201.
For content analysing the election programs of the developing East European
party systems the following subcategories have been used:
Table 2: Subcategories to be Used for Parties in Transitional Democracies
Domain 1: External Relations
1011 Russia/USSR/CIS: Positive
1012 Western States: Positive
1013 Eastern European Countries:
positive
1014 Baltic States: Positive
1015 Nordic Council: Positive
1016 SFR Yugoslavia: Positive
1021 Russia/USSR/CIS: Negative
1022 Western States: Negative
1023 East European Countries:
Negative
1024 Baltic States: Negative
1025 Nordic Council: Negative
1026 SFR Yugoslavia: Negative
1031 Russian Army: Negative
1032 Independence: Positive
1033 Rights of Nations: Positive
Domain 2: Freedom and Democracy
2021 Transition to Democracy
2022 Restrictive Citizenship
2023 Lax Citizenship
2031 Presidential Regime: Positive
2032 Republic: Positive
2041 Monarchy: Positive
Domain 3: Political System
3011 Republican Powers: Positive
3051 Public Situation: Negative
3052 Communist: Positive
3053 Communist: Negative
3054 Rehabilitation and
Compensation
3055 Political Coalitions
Domain 4: Economy
4011 Privatisation: Positive
4012 Control of Economy: Negative
4013 Property-Restitution:
Positive
4014 Privatisation Vouchers:
Positive
4121 Social Ownership: Positive
4122 Mixed Economy: Positive
4123 Publicly-Owned Industry:
Positive
4124 Socialist Property: Positive
4131 Property-Restitution:
Negative
4132 Privatisation: Negative
Domain 5: Welfare and Quality of Life
5021 Private-Public Mix in Culture
5031 Private-Public Mix in Social
Justice
5041 Private-Public Mix in Welfare
5061 Private-Public Mix in
Education
Domain 6: Fabric of Society
6011 The Karabakh Issue
6012 Rebuilding the USSR
6013 National Security
6061 General Crisis
6071 Cultural Autonomy: Positve
6072 Multiculturalism pro Roma
6081 Multiculturalism against
Roma
Domain 7: Social Groups
7051 Minorities Inland
7052 Minorities Abroad
7061 War Participants
7062 Refugees
For Cyprus, the subcategory 6014 ‘Cyprus Issue’ was created, for Mexico, the
subcategory 2033 ‘Checks and Balances’ was introduced. Definitions of all
subcategories are given in Section 9.
Up to now, subcategories have been mainly created for East European parties
to allow studying party systems in the making. For some party systems,
subcategories were also coded for a more country-specific analysis of programmatic
4
party competition. As such, subcategories are part of the standard classification of
policy preferences. But creating new subcategories should be avoided as far as
possible, because the overall comparability of the manifesto data is reduced to the
standard categories.
Decision Rule No 3: Creating Subcategories
Look at all uncoded sentences a second time and try to figure out whether some of
these statements have an equivalent meaning. Make sure that there really is no
related Standard Category that captures the sense of these quasi-sentences. Should
many quasi-sentences contain the same arguments which are not subsumable under
one of the 56 Standard Categories, note down a temporary 4-digit code and a
temporary definition for a new subcategory and contact the supervisor. Do not
create subcategories for each and every single issue because this is useless even
when comparing parties from the same party system. Never create new categories
without checking with the supervisor because you may destroy the
comparability of the data.
To check with the supervisor before creating a sub-category is crucial since
coders tend to diversify the existing standard categories into subcategories. Even
trained coders tend to create too many subcategories, i.e. subcategories containing
only one or two quasi-sentences. From more than 80 subcategories that had been
created for transitional countries, 30 were re-aggregated into the main Standard
Categories because they were almost empty and fitted to one the Standard
Categories.
4.2.3 Coding Problems and Difficulties
Coding problems may concern unitizing or/and scoring. As with uncodable
sentences, all unclear statements should be marked and reread at the end of the
coding procedure.
4.2.3.1 Problems with Unitising
To prevent unitising mistakes, Commandment No. 9 spells out that whenever
coding units are in doubt, the respective sentence must be coded twice, in two
logically different rounds, and the two solutions for unitising have to be cross-
checked before a final decision is taken on breaking up a sentence into quasi-
sentences. In a first round, coders should choose one code for the overarching
preference of the whole sentence and finish the coding of all the sentences of the
whole paragraph or section. In the second round, a separate row of codes for the
quasi-sentences will be added. The inference from both rows of codes should then be
compared to the qualitative arguments. For example, let us suppose that a sentence-
based coding of a paragraph or section produces 6 codes, 3 for welfare state
expansion and 3 for environmental protection, whereas a quasi-sentence-based
2
coding of the same paragraph or section produces 12 codes with 3 for welfare state
expansion and 9 for environmental protection. The sentence-based coding paints the
picture of a party that is equally in favour of welfare and environment, whereas the
quasi-sentence-based coding leaves the impression of a party overwhelmingly
concerned with the environment. These different impressions can then be compared
to the arguments given in the whole section. The quantitative codes should give a
balanced view; they should ‘mirror’ the qualitative arguments as far as possible.
In case of remaining doubts, ask the supervisor!
4.2.3.2 Problems with Scoring
a. No category seems to apply
The coding frame was created to capture the total manifesto content.
Nonetheless, it may be that no category is available for a particular problem in a
particular country. These quasi-sentences are treated as uncodable (000). It is
important to realize that ‘uncoded’ does not necessarily mean that a sentence is
devoid of meaning (although of course it may be); only that it cannot be fitted into
the present coding frame. However, Commandment No. 10 is that sentences should
be coded if at all possible. To follow this there are a number of specific decision
rules on how to tackle with difficult coding decisions.
In many countries some of the categories are not much used (for instance
(405) ‘Corporatism’ and (409) ‘Keynesian Demand Management’), but are vital for
comparative reasons. Therefore, some categories may be left empty at the end of the
coding procedure. On the other hand seldom used categories are the most difficult to
handle.
Decision Rule No 4: Checking Definitions of all Categories in Policy Domains
Whenever tempted to treat a quasi-sentence as uncodable, read the definitions of
categories in the relevant policy domains once again because it might well be that
the quasi-sentence contains a policy position that is taken only seldom. Therefore,
the specific definition of the respective category may just have been forgotten.
A quasi-sentence may be without meaning but may nevertheless be part of
the discussion of a problem and have a stylistic or linking function, for example:
‘The next government will do everything in its power to defend the interests
of the farmers. To this end, we envisage several measures. Firstly, we will
increase payments of all kinds to farmers. ...’
These are three quasi-sentences. The middle sentence itself is devoid of any
policy-content but is a part of the same argument. Therefore, category (703)
‘Agriculture’ is coded three times.
Decision Rule No 5: Identifying Connecting Sentences
Some sentences, which may otherwise be uncodable, may just be connecting
sentences between two arguments (for instance: Therefore, we are going to do three
things.) These connecting sentences themselves do not constitute meaningful
arguments but are part of an ongoing argument. Therefore, connecting sentences
should be coded in the same category as surrounding sentences or as the bulk of the
paragraph they appear in.
Because of the general commandment to classify quasi-sentences if at all
possible, all quasi-sentences treated as uncodable must be checked again after coding
the total program.
b. More than one category seems to apply
The opposite difficulty arises if more than one category seems to apply. The
Standard Classification Scheme was developed to cover the whole content of election
programs. Election programs do not only mention policy preferences, but also
include preferences about the polity and the politics of the country. The term ‘polity’
refers to the institutional dimension of political systems, covering all political
institutions such as electoral rules and principles of decision making as well as the
organisations of interest intermediation and governance. The term ‘politics’ refers to
all processes of interest intermediation and governance. A classification scheme
covering the whole content of national election programs should also allow for
coding these polity and politics preferences. Some categories such as (203)
‘Constitutionalism: Positive’ and (204) ‘Constitutionalism: Negative’ address the
polity, others such as (303) ‘Governmental and Administrative Efficiency: Positive’
address politics, still others such as (301) ‘Decentralisation: Positive’ and (302)
‘Centralisation: Positive’ include polity, politics, as well as policy issues.
The problem of multiple coding solutions occurs when polity, politics, and/or
policy arguments are combined into one sentence:
‘Because we want worldwide peace, we will add this goal to our constitution.’
In this case, the polity is merely a means to achieve a policy goal. This
difficulty can be dealt with by applying the following decision rules:
4
Decision Rule No 6: Policy Goals “Beat” Politics, Polity, and Policy Means
Whenever a sentence combines the means with the achievement of a policy goal, the
policy goal is to be chosen.
These general decision rules often apply to the following specific choices:
Decision Rule No 7: Specific Policy Positions “Beat” (303) ‘Efficiency’
Whenever there is a choice between category (303) ‘Governmental and
Administrative Efficiency: Positive’, defined as the need for efficiency and economy
in government and administration, and another policy category from Domains 1 to 7,
the specific policy position is to be chosen.
Decision Rule No 8: Specific Policy Positions ‘Beat’ (305) ‘Political Authority’
Whenever there is a choice between category (305) ‘Political Authority’, defined as
the party’s general competence to govern or the general critique of opponent parties’
competence, on the one hand and another category from Policy Domains 1 to 7, the
specific policy position is to be chosen.
And example for the rule that policy goals beat policy means is provided by
the following sentence:
“We will achieve world wide peace by disarmament.”
The argument in this sentence is ‘Peace’ (106), not ‘Military Negative’ (105)
The problem of choosing between two categories also occurs with respect to
group politics, for instance: ‘We want more social security for workers’. In this case,
category (701) ‘Labour Groups’ or category (504) ‘Welfare State Expansion’ may apply.
Decision Rule No 9: Specific Policy Positions ‘Beat’ Group Politics except Group
(703) ‘Agriculture’
Whenever there is a choice between a specific policy position given in Policy
Domains 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 on the one hand and a social group from Domain 7 on the
other hand, take the specific policy position. This rule does not apply to category
(703) ‘Agriculture’. All quasi-sentences devoted to agriculture are to be coded into
category 703, even if a specific policy position such as (402) ‘Incentives’ or (410)
‘Economic Growth’ is taken to further the interests of farmers. Whenever agriculture
is positively mentioned, code 703 has to be used.
In addition to the aforementioned cases of choice, there is one category, (408)
‘General Economic Goals’, which is non-positional and should, therefore, be avoided if
possible.
Decision Rule No 10: Specific Policy Positions ‘Beat’ (408) ‘General Economic
Goals’
Whenever there is a choice between a more specific policy position given in Policy
Domains 1 to 7 and category (408) ‘General Economic Goals’, the specific policy
positions (for instance (410) ‘Economic Growth’) is to be chosen instead of 408.
Even after applying these decision rules, one may still not be sure where an
argument is leading. In many cases, section headings can be used to make a decision:
Decision Rule No 11: Section Headings as Guidelines
Look at the section heading of the quasi-sentence in question. Then, take the
category which covers the topic of the section or the heading. Thus, section headings
are taken as guidelines for coding although section headings themselves are not to
be coded.
Many of these problems may be solved by taking the context of the ambiguous
quasi-sentence into account. Coders should first of all study the sentences that follow
because the first quasi-sentence may be part of an argument explicated in the next
sentences. Therefore, it is always useful to start the coding procedure by reading the
whole paragraph.
For all other cases in which more than one category seems to apply, the coder
has to decide what the most important concern of the argument is since one, and
only one, category has to be chosen for each argument. There is only one exception
to the ‘one-and only one’ rule:
Decision Rule No 12: European Level and National Level
Policies at the European level may be discussed with respect to their impact at the
national level. In these cases, (108) ‘European Community: positive’ or (110)
‘European Community: negative’ as well as the specific national position in Policy
Domains 2 to 7 have to be coded.
Just as with unitising (see p. 8), scoring problems often occur with the
introductory parts and the summary of long programs as well as with short
programs. In both cases, many arguments are typically condensed into very few
6
sentences, often containing numerous commas and semicolons. In case of such
difficulties, the rest of the manifesto should be coded before the introductory part is
tackled as this will give hints on how to solve the riddles of the introductory
sentences.
In case of very short programs with just one to five pages, unitising and
scoring decisions concerning a few sentences can change the result of the content
analysis. Therefore, the following decision rule should be applied:
Decision Rule No 13: Double-check each Code Chosen for Short Manifestos
Short manifestos have to be coded twice because each coding decision is particularly
crucial. In case of short programs, make sure that no argument is neglected due to
decision rules 6 to 10. Make sure that the numerical coding solution mirrors all
qualitative arguments given in such short programs, even if they are hidden in
subordinate clauses.
c. The statement seems unclear
Even after applying Decision Rules No 1 to 13, one may still not be sure where
an argument is leading. Many of these problems may be solved by taking the context
of the ambiguous quasi-sentence into account. Coders should first of all take into
account the following sentences because the first (quasi-) sentence may be part of an
argument which is explicated in the next sentences. Therefore, it is always useful to
start the coding procedure by reading the whole paragraph.
In some cases, crucial decisions have to be made with respect to the manifest
or latent content of statements. No inferences should be made with respect to the
meaning of statements. The coder has to code what the statement says, not what he
or she thinks it may lead to in the end. Thus, if a party claims that a measure favours
employees, (701) ‘Labour Groups: Positive’ has to be coded although you may feel sure
that it is to their detriment.
As with uncodable sentences, all unclear statements should be marked and
reread at the end of coding. The reason is that many statements which may be
uncodable at first sight may become clear in the context of the whole program.
Some of the coding problems will be solved with growing experience.
However, whenever the coder is unsure about which category is to be taken, the
sentence in question should be translated into English and the supervisor should be
contacted. From 1989 to 2009 Andrea Volkens (volkens@wzb.eu) served as the
central supervisor. From 01.11.2009 onwards Annika Werner takes this position
(werner@wzb.eu).
4.3 Coding Sheet
After finishing the coding of a manifesto, a tally is kept on a coding sheet
given in this section. The coding sheet shows the respective country, party, and
election year and gives the absolute number of quasi-sentences coded into each
standard category of the standard coding frame as well as the total number of quasi-
sentences. However, before even starting with Decision Rule No 1, first of all take the
following step:
Rule No 14: Do not start with production coding before having done the training
and entry tests given in section 6 and 7 of the handbook because both tests are
used for identifying coding mistakes. Thus, wait for the reply of the supervisor
or you might have to do it all over again!
8
Coding Sheet for 56 Standard Categories
COUNTRY: PARTY: YEAR:
000: 410:
101: 411:
102: 412:
103: 413:
104: 414:
105: 415:
106: 416:
107: 501:
108: 502:
109: 503:
110: 504:
201: 505:
202: 506:
203: 507:
204: 601:
301: 602:
302: 603:
303: 604:
304: 605:
305: 606:
401: 607:
402: 608:
403: 701:
404: 702:
405: 703:
406: 704:
407: 705:
408: 706:
409: Total N:
Coding Sheet for 56 Standard Categories plus Subcategories
COUNTRY: PARTY: YEAR:
000 409: 706: 3055:
101: 410: 1011: 4011:
102: 411: 1012: 4012:
103: 412: 1013: 4013:
104: 413: 1014: 4014:
105: 414: 1015: 4121:
106: 415: 1016: 4122:
107: 416: 1021: 4123:
108: 501: 1022: 4124:
109: 502: 1023: 4131:
110: 503: 1024: 4132:
201: 504: 1025: 5021:
202: 505: 1026: 5031:
203: 506: 1031: 5041:
204: 507: 1032: 5061:
301: 601: 1033: 6011:
302: 602: 2021: 6012:
303: 603: 2022: 6013:
304: 604: 2023: 6014:
305: 605: 2031: 6061:
401: 606: 2032: 6071:
402: 607: 2033: 6072:
403: 608: 2041: 6081:
404: 701: 3011: 7051:
405: 702: 3051: 7052:
406: 703: 3052: 7061:
407: 704: 3053: 7062:
408: 705: 3054: Total N:
10
5. Coding Exercise
The following sample texts with solutions for the identification of quasi-
sentences and categories serve as exercises of coding.
Country: Great Britian
Name of the Party/Alliance: The Liberal/SDP Alliance
Year: 1983
Title: ‘Working together for Britain'
(Extracts)
The General Election on June 9th, 1983 will be seen as a watershed in
British politics.
It may be recalled as the fateful day when depression became
hopelessness and the slide of the post-war years accelerated into the depths of
decline. Alternatively it may be remembered as the turning point when the
people of this country, at the eleventh hour, decided to turn their backs on
dogma and bitterness and chose a new road of partnership and progress. 
It is to offer real hope of a fresh start for Britain that the Alliance
between our two parties has been created. What we have done is unique in the
history of British parliamentary democracy.  Two parties, one with a proud
history, and one born only two years ago out of a frustration with the old
systems of politics, have come together to offer an alternative government
pledged to bring the country together again. 
The Conservative and Labour parties between them have made an
industrial wasteland out of a country which was once the workshop of the
world.  Manufacturing output from Britain is back to the level of nearly 20
years ago.  Unemployment is still rising and there are now generations of
school-leavers who no longer even hope for work.  Mrs Thatcher's
government stands idly by, hoping that the blind forces of the marketplace will
restore the jobs and factories that its indifference has destroyed.  The Labour
Party's response is massive further nationalisation, a centralised state socialist
economy and rigid controls over enterprise. The choice which Tories and
socialists offer at this election is one between neglect and interference. 
Neither of them understands that it is only by working together in the
companies and communities of Britain that we can overcome the economic
problems which beset us.  Meanwhile the very fabric of our common life
together deteriorates.  The record wave of violence and crime and increased
personal stress are all signs of a society at war with itself.  Rundown cities and
declining rural services alike tell a story of a warped sense of priorities by
successive governments.  Mrs Thatcher promised 'to bring harmony where
there is discord'.  Instead her own example of confrontation has inflamed the
bitterness so many people feel at what has happened to their own lives and local
communities. 
Our Alliance wants to call a halt to confrontation politics.  We believe 000
000
000
305
305
606
305
410
408
305
305
305
606
606
605
606
606
606
606
we have set an example by working together as two separate parties within an
alliance of principle.  Our whole approach is based on co-operation: not just
between our parties but between management and workers, between people of
different races and above all between government and people.  Because we
are not prisoners of ideology we shall listen to the people we represent and
ensure that the good sense of the voters is allowed to illuminate the corridors of
Westminster and Whitehall. 
STRATEGY FOR INDUSTRIAL SUCCESS
The Alliance is alone in recognising that Britain's industrial crisis cannot
be solved by short-term measures such as import controls or money supply
targets.  Our crisis goes deep.  Its roots lie in the class divisions of our
society,  in the vested interests of the Tory and Labour parties, in the refusal
of management and unions to wide democracy in industry,  in the way profits
and risks are shared. 
The policies offered by the two class-based parties will further divide the
nation North v South, Management v Labour.  Our greatest need is to build a
sense of belonging to one community.  We are all in it together.  It is
impossible for one side or the other in Britain to 'win'.  Conflict in industrial
relations means that we all lose. 
The Alliance is committed to policies which will invest resources in the
high-technology industries of the future.  We are committed to a major new
effort in education and training.  We are pledged to trade union reform to
tough anti-monopoly measures. 
THE IMMEDIATE CRISIS: JOBS AND PRICES
Our economic crisis demands tough immediate action.  It also requires
a Government with the courage to implement those strategic and structural
reforms which alone can end the civil war between the two sides of industry. 
The immediate priority is to reduce unemployment. Why?  To the
Alliance unemployment is a scandal; robbing men and women of their careers;
 blighting the prospects for a quarter of all our young people,  wasting our
national resources, aborting our chances of industrial recovery,  dividing
our nation and fuelling hopelessness and crime. 
Much of the present unemployment is a direct result of the civil war in
British industry, of restrictive practices and low investment.  But in addition,
conservative Government policies have caused unemployment to rise.  An
Alliance Government would cause unemployment to fall. How?  Can it be done
without releasing a fresh wave of inflation? 
We believe it can.  We propose a carefully devised and costed jobs
programme aimed at reducing unemployment by 1 million over two years. 
606
606
202
606
606
606
606
202
606
606
606
606
606
606
411
506
403
305
305
408
408
701
706
410
408
606
605
408
408
408
414
414
504
12
This programme will be supported by immediate measures to help those hardest
hit by the slump - the disadvantaged, the pensioners, the poor. 
Ours is a programme of mind, heart and will.  It is a programme that
will work! The Programme has three points:  Fiscal and Financial Policies for
Growth;  Direct Action to provide jobs;  An Incomes Strategy that will stick.

PARTERNSHIP IN INDUSTRY
Britain has made little progress towards industrial democracy, yet
several of our European partners have long traditions of participation and co-
operation backed by legislation.  They do not face the obstacles to progress
with which our divisive industrial relations present us. To be fully effective,
proposals for participation in industry need to be buttressed by action on two
fronts:  a major extension of profit sharing and worker share-ownership to
give people a real stake where they work as well as the ability to participate in
decision-taking,  and reform of the trade unions to make them genuinely
representative institutions. 
PARTICIPATION AT WORK
We propose enabling legislation that will offer a flexible and sensible
approach: 
An Industrial Democracy Act to provide for the introduction of employee
participation at all levels,  incentives for employee share-ownership, 
employee rights to information, and an Industrial Democracy Agency (IDA) to
advise on and monitor the introduction of these measures: 
Employee Councils covering each place of work (subject to exemption for
small units) for all companies employing over 1,000 people.  Smaller
companies would also be encouraged to introduce Employee Councils. 
GOVERNMENT AND INDUSTRY
Priority for Industry
The role of an Alliance government in relation to private industry will be
to provide selective assistance taking a number of forms: 
an industrial credit scheme to provide low-interest, long-term finance for
projects directed at modernising industry; 
A national innovation policy, to provide selective assistance for high-risk
projects,  particularly involving the development of new technologies 
and for research and development in potential growth industries; 
Public purchasing policies to stimulate innovation,  encourage the
introduction of crucial technologies and aid small businesses; 
503
404
404
410
504
701
202
606
202
701
202
202
202
701
201
202
202
202
402
402
402
411
410
411
411
we will establish a Cabinet Committee chaired by the Prime Minster at the
centre of decision-taking on all policies with a bearing on the performance of
industry. 
The Alliance will strengthen the Monopolies' and Mergers' Commission to
ensure its ability to prevent monopoly and unhealthy concentrations of
industrial and commercial power. The aim is to guarantee fair competition
and to protect the interests of employers, consumers and shareholders. 
New and Small Business
To encourage the growth of new and small businesses, we will attack red
tape and provide further financial and management assistance by: 
Extending the Loan Guarantee Scheme, in the first instance raising the
maximum permitted loan to £150,000;  and the Business Start-Up Scheme,
raising the upper limit for investment to £75,000;  and introducing Small
Firm Investment Companies to provide financial and management help; 
zero-rating building repairs and maintenance for VAT purposes and
reducing commercial rates by 10 per cent; 
making sure the Department of Industry co-ordinates and publicises
schemes for small businessesand that government aid ceases to discriminate
against small businesses; 
Tailoring national legislation such as the Health and Safety Regulations to
the needs of small businesses and amending the statutory sick pay scheme to
exclude small businesses. 
Agriculture and Fisheries
Agriculture is an important industry and employer. To encourage its
further development we will: 
Increase Government support for effective agricultural marketing at home
and abroad and continue support for 'Food from Britain'; 
ensure that agriculture has access like other industries to the industrial
credit scheme we propose; 
encourage greater access to farming, especially by young entrants.  The Alliance is determined to safeguard the future of our fishing industry
which needs help to re-build after years of uncertainty and the drastic
consequences for the deep-sea fleet of 200-mile limits in the waters they used
to fish. 
402
303
403
403
402
402
402
402
402
402
402
402
402
402
703
703
703
703
703
703
703
14
Education and training
The third basic condition for industrial success is a people with the skills
and self-confidence that will be needed for the challenges of new technology. 
The education and training systems are not providing enough people with the
skills necessary to make them employable and the country successful in
competition with its rivals.  We are falling further behind. Japan on present
plans will be educating all its young people to the age of 18 by 1990. More
than 90 per cent of the 16-19 age group in Germany gain recognised technical
qualifications.  And it is not just a matter of school-leavers.  Our managers
are less professionally qualified than our main competitors.  From the bottom
to top we are underskilled, and this has to be put right if we are to prosper in
future.  To do this, to raise standards in education and training and to improve
their effectiveness is the object of proposals set out in the next Section. 
411
411
411
506
411
506
411
411
411
Country: New Zealand
Name of the Party/Alliance: National Party
Year: 1972
Title: A Guide to what the next National Government will do for
New Zealand
(Extracts)
THE ECONOMY
In 1972 New Zealand had, for the first time, more overseas reserves than
total overseas debt.  Labour has dissipated these reserves, borrowed about
$2,00 million overseas and incurred annual interest charges mortgaging almost
our total export earnings from butter and cheese. 
Inflation in 1972 was about 5 per cent, the second lowest of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) nations. 
Today it is about 15 per cent, well above the OECD average,  and New Zealand
has an external deficit per head of population second only to Iceland. 
The first three years of the coming National Government will be very
largely devoted to restoring New Zealand's shattered economy. 
Continuous attention to economic trends and problems will replace stop-
go and panic measures.  And the taxation system will be used to give
incentives for desirable economic activity. 
We will take steps to stimulate savings.  Savings accounts, limited as
to amount, will be established.  The deposits of individuals will earn an
interest rate at least equal to the annual rate of inflation thus preserving the
purchasing power of savings. 
We believe that continued double-figure inflation will destroy the basis
of the New Zealand economy and cause untold misery.  The fight against
increases in the cost of living is the most important single issue in economic
management. 
People without jobs represent waste of productive effort:  National
supports a policy of full employment  and the dignity of labour.  We do not
accept unemployment as a balancing factor in economic management. 
414
414
414
414
414
408
408
402
414
414
414
414
414
410
408
701
701
405
405
Finally, the National Development Council will be restored and
consultation resumed between Government departments, academic specialists
and private industry, including farming and organised labour.  The vital role
of every section of productive industry will be recognised. 
It is these moves which will put New Zealand on the way to economic
recovery.  And reduce the spiraling rate of inflation. 
408
414
16
SUPERANNUATION
Seldom has any policy released by an opposition party had the impact
that the National Superannuation scheme has had.  It is designed to give every
New Zealander dignity and a decent income in retirement.  Here's how it will
operate: 
Anyone who is 60 years old, or more, and who has lived in New Zealand
for at least ten years will receive National Superannuation, starting next year.
 And with three big annual jumps in the rate of benefit it will be fully
operating by 1978. 
To guarantee our elderly retired folk a decent minimum income, the full
rate of National Superannuation, for a married couple, will be 80% of the
average weekly ordinary time wage.  It will be recalculated every six months.

In 1976, to start the scheme, the rate will be 65% of the average wage; 
in 1977 it will be raised to 70%  and in 1978 to the full 80%. The rate for
single persons, at all times, will be 60% of the married rate. 
504
504
504
504
504
504
504
504
504
504
504
504
The present average weekly wage is $99 and so, if there is no increase at
all in wage rates in the next three years, the rates of National Superannuation
will be shown in the box* below (*box not shown). 
Next year, under National, the age and universal superannuation
benefits will merge to form National Superannuation. 
At present both these benefits pay $51.26 to a married couple and $30.75
to a single person, so even in the first year of National Superannuation, a
married couple over 60 who have no other income will have $6.18 a week more
to spend than they do now and a single beneficiary will receive, after tax, $3.15
a week more than he now gets by way of age benefits, or universal
superannuation. 
Of course those with other income will receive the benefit too, but they
will pay more tax on their bigger incomes. 
By 1978 a married couple will receive a net $18.06 a week more than the
present age benefit or universal annuation and a single person will be receiving
a net $10.17 a week more.  For the single person, that is a pay rise of more
than 33%.
504
504
503
504
504
The big and comforting thing about National Superannuation is that
504
everyone gets it, just so long as they have lived in New Zealand for ten years or
more and are aged 60 or over. 
They will not, nor will anyone, be expected to make special contributions
over a period of years, in order to qualify.  The scheme is financed out of
504
504
ordinary taxation so there is nothing to be deducted from wages; no special
payments of any kind. 
This means that the present age beneficiary will receive National 504
Superannuation next year.  So will the retired Government servant (in
addition to the pension from the Government superannuation fund which he
had paid for).  And so will all the people who are drawing pensions from
company and other private superannuation schemes. 
In recent weeks, the Government has been making moves to compensate
for the weaknesses revealed in their own scheme, when compared with
National's.  But the fact remains that National's is the only superannuation
scheme that offers a fair deal to everyone in their years of retirement. 
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Since 1975 is International Women's Year, it can be expected that all political
parties will talk a great deal about their 'women's policies'.  Unfortunately
most will be little more than window dressing.  National's plans go far
beyond this. 
We will begin by introducing legislation to remove existing legal
discrimination relating to women,  and to prohibit discrimination against any
person by reason of sex. 
We will also establish a Human Rights Commission which will ensure
that equal rights legislation is enforced and that women have an effective and
inexpensive means of redress.  The Commission will investigate cases of
discrimination presented to it and recommend civil action to the Attorney-
General. 
Full consideration will be given to the recommendations of the Select
Committee on Women's Rights.  We will set priorities for implementation, in
consultation with women's organisations. 
We will legislate to ensure that all areas of discrimination in
employment are removed  and that merit is the sole criterion in respect of job
applications, selection and promotion. 
To encourage women who wish to enter, return to or remain in
employment, National will encourage employers to establish flexible working
patterns, such as glide time, part-time, job sharing, and multi-shift work. 
Thus assisting women who undertake the dual role of worker and mother. 
We will give special attention to the problems associated with re-entry
to the work force and ensure that greater job retraining opportunities are
available. 
Maternity leave without pay will be available to women for a period of
up to 12 weeks, without loss of job security, promotion or superannuation
rights, providing this does not cause undue disruption to a business enterprise.

The new National Government will appoint women to boards,
commissions and tribunals and will give consideration to the appointment of
women as industrial mediators. 
We will also support increased participation of women in the judicial 504
504
503
503
706
706
706
503
503
503
503
706
706
503
503
706
706
706
706
706
503
18
system and recognise no sex barriers in the exercise of any judicial office. 
Suitably qualified women will be given exactly the same consideration as men.

National will ensure that early childhood education is generally
available (where feasible) as an integral part of the education system.  Priority
will be given to such areas as new housing suburbs and regenerated inner city
areas. 
Financial assistance will be provided through approved voluntary
agencies to establish centres for those children who need day care but whose
parents cannot afford to pay the full cost. 
National will also promote and encourage job training and retraining,
"second chance" education  and promote a policy of life-long education for
women. 
We will tackle the problems women face with housing.  Under National
the Housing Corporation will not differentiate between men and women
borrowers on grounds of sex. 
We will introduce a flexible principal repayment plan to meet those
cases where the wife works, leaves the work force to raise a family and then
returns to work. 
The National Party believes all women must have the opportunity to
participate on the basis of full equality in the social, cultural, economic and
political spheres of New Zealand society. 
503
506
411
504
411
706
706
503
706
503
6. Training Test
The following pages have to be coded as a training test. A copy of this text with the
marked quasi-sentences and the number of identified categories in the margin of the
pages has to be send to the supervisor. The supervisor evaluates the test and sends a
comprehensive reply to the coder, giving feedback on mistakes and general
problems. Thereby, the coder is able to learn about the pitfalls of manifesto coding
intensively. The coder should be aware that this training test is based on a very
difficult text. No coder is expected to code without any mistakes and hardly any
coder is ever going to come across such a difficult manifesto in his or her actual
manifesto coding. The purpose is simply to trigger mistakes so that these mistakes
can be avoided in the production coding.
After the training test is completed, sent to the supervisor and their feedback
received and intensively studied, a final entry test has to be taken, which can be
found in section 7. This entry test has to be checked by the supervisor before the
actual coding is started to check whether the correspondence in coding is sufficiently
high.
Country: Australia
Name of the Party/Alliance: National Country Party
Year: 1966
Title: We will grow, prosper
(extracts)
‘WE WILL GROW, PROSPER’
The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr McEwen) said last night all the Government’s policies
were aimed at building an Australia respected and trusted throughout the world. Mr
McEwen, delivering the Country party policy speech at Sheparton, said: The country
party, the Government, has one constant and continuing policy objective - to make
Australia strong, safe, prosperous; to build a modern Australia, with equal
opportunity for all:
where the aged, and the infirm, are looked after;
where the young are well educated, properly trained, to play their part in making the
greater Australia of the future;
where every man, woman and child - native-born Australians and migrants alike -
can live in freedom, enjoying the rewards of their own efforts, obtaining their just
share of the wealth of the community.
Under our coalition Government’s policies, Australia’s advance has been remarkable.
Here are the results of the 17 years of our responsibility in Government:
3.5 million more people since we came to office - half of them migrants;
1.25 million new jobs (1.6 million new homes built);
20
tremendous increases in wool production; wheat, meat, sugar, dairy products, fruit
and so on - with fewer workers.
The volume of exports more than doubled.
More than 20,000 new factories; factory production increased two and a half times.
Mineral production more than doubled.
2,5 million more vehicles on the road - a car for every four people;
unprecedented developments in community services; roads, dams, power houses,
hospitals, schools.
Industries everywhere are creating new wealth, ultimately distributed for all the
people in better wages, social services and health, in education and defence.
In 17 years the total production of Australia, including all primary and secondary
industries and the service industries which go with them, has doubled.
If in 1949, in a policy speech I had said: ‘Put the Country party and the Liberal party
in power and our policies will double the size of the Australian economy in 17 years’,
this would have been treated with derision. But we have done it!
This is a story of growth; of increasing national strength; greater safety; higher
prosperity; sharing the prosperity.
Three years ago, we said our policies would produce 25 per cent growth over five
years. Despite the disastrous drought, this objective is well in sight. I now say the
next five years will see this rate continued.
We are determined that successive generations of Australians will enjoy an even
greater measure than we do, an Australian way of life of which we can be proud, and
the rest of the world envy.
ALLIANCES
In today’s world, no country can stand alone. Safety and security demand that our
own growing strength be allied with that of others who share our beliefs in the right
of free people to remain free. This is the basis of our foreign policy.
We must be sure that if our freedom is threatened we will not be left to stand alone.
So we are concerned with the integrity of other small, free countries.
The respect for Australia as a staunch and reliable ally has never been higher. Our
great association with Britain and the Commonwealth have been strengthened. We
have stood with Britain in preserving the security of Malaysia.
Under the AZEUS Treaty we, with New England, have established a great alliance with
the United States.
Under SEATO we are linked with Britain, the United States and France, and with
Asian countries from Pakistan to the Philippines.
PRUDENCE
We help the less-developed countries with aid, and we were the first in the world to
give tariff preference to them.
We strive constantly for peace, through the United Nations, and will do so
unceasingly.
But prudence and security demand that we work also for strong and lasting alliances.
The most powerful country in the world - the United States - will be with us to
protect our freedom if we are threatened with aggression, just as the United States
today is protecting the freedom of the people of South Vietnam from communist
aggression.
The United States seeks no material gain, fighting this distant war. Australia seeks
only to prove that aggression will not succeed.
And as Australia herself would expect help if in need, we now demonstrate that we
are willing to extend our help to a small, free people under attack.
We want to so conduct ourselves that the United States will not hesitate to stand
between Australia and an aggressor. America is the one country that can do this.
Our troops in South Vietnam earn for us the right to the protection of the United
States and our other treaty allies, should Australia be threatened.
Voluntary recruiting has not produced the numbers of men required for the Army.
The Government did try, long and hard, to enlist sufficient men as volunteers.
Despite all its efforts not enough men came forward to enable us to play our present
part with the British in Malaysia and the Americans in South Vietnam. So we have
added to the ranks of our volunteer regular army the necessary numbers of national
servicemen to meet the nation’s requirements.
To say that we would honor our obligations with the United States and our other
allies only if enough volunteers came forward would show Australia as a very
uncertain ally.
American conscripts have helped to save us once. No Australian would suggest that
we were not grateful that they defended us in our day of peril.
Surely no responsible Australian would suggest that, in the absence of sufficient
volunteers, we should wait until war reaches Australia itself before we called
conscripts to the protection of our homeland.
We in the Government are sure that we have acted properly in bringing in National
Service so that we may join with America in her stand to prevent the outward
expansion of aggressive communism.
Of course, safety is not secured only by modern defence forces and alliances. There
must be great economic strength - an industrial base capable of servicing and
maintaining today’s complex military operations; food and mineral production for
our own needs, and to earn foreign exchange; good roads and railways; efficient
ports.
Defence security and economic strength go hand in hand. Our policies promote
economic strength. Look at the primary industries.
By 1964, before the calamitous drought total farm output was 67 per cent higher
than when we came to office.
Wool, still the great foreign country earner, has nearly doubled in production since
the war. Wool has been helped by the Japanese Trade Treaty; taxation incentives;
huge expenditure on research and technology; and Government-supported
promotion activity.
22
CROP RECORD
Wheatgrowers are about to harvest what could be an all-time record crop; double the
average crop of the early ‘fifties’. The guaranteed price covers more than 200 million
bushels each harvest. This has given the industry the confidence necessary for
expansion.
Total bounty payments provided by our Government to the dairy industry, to offset
high costs and difficult markets, have amounted to just on 3500 million. A quarter of
a million people depend on the dairy industry.
The great sugar industry has a fair price in the home market; a good price for sales
under the agreement with Britain; negotiated access for profitable sales to America.
The Japanese Trade Treaty has made Japan our biggest sugar customer.
In my policy speech, three years ago, I said: ‘If problems arise, we will be ready to
help.’ We have helped.
The sugar industry, through no fault of its own, is in serious temporary difficulty. It
asked for, and our Government has given a loan of $19 million to augment pool
payments from this year’s crop.
For Australian beef producers, negotiated access to the United States market, and
now to Japan, has been worth millions.
We have legislated to give effect to marketing or stabilisation plans for canned and
dried fruits, for eggs, and also for tobacco, which has been lifted from a peasant
industry to one of high average incomes.
Cotton is taking dramatic strides forward under the stimulus of our policies.
There are problems - in the apple and pear industry; in dairying; the British move
towards the European Common Market; the never-ending job of gaining access to
markets. Much has been achieved in meeting these problems. We will never let up in
our efforts.
EXPANSION
Our policies for secondary industry are policies for growth, sound expansion, jobs,
jobs for a growing, well-paid work force, more than 100,000 new jobs a year.
Tariff machinery is continually improved to give prompt and adequate tariff
protection; to prevent damage by dumping and disruptive imports.
We give efficient secondary industry a secure grip on the home market. From this
base we encourage it to develop exports with the help of a variety of export
incentives.
Investment in manufacturing has risen from $120 million a year to $1000 million a
year.
Great new industries are providing well-paid employment for more and more
Australians. Average earnings in real `spending-power terms`, are up 50 per cent.
Help is provided for the aged, the infirm, the sick; health and social-service
payments lifted from $162 million to $1020 million a year.
Australia can and must look after the needs of the aged and the infirm. They must be
given a full share of benefit from the nation’s growth.
FREIGHTS
We have initiated moves to stem overseas freight rises by rationalisation of overseas
shipping services; for containerisation and other modern cargo-handling methods,
and by establishment of modern port facilities.
Industry stabilisation plans form part of the compensation to export industries for
the burden of costs arising from fast national growth.
So does the $28 million-a-year subsidy on superphosphate, and our new subsidy on
nitrogenous fertilisers of $30 per ton nitrogen content.
Petrol prices have been reduced to no higher than four pence a gallon over city
prices. Many inland people have been saved more than a shilling a gallon. For years
the Country party policy urged this plan.
Special taxation allowance have been granted to primary producers; huge sums
provided for agricultural research and extension; massive help for wool promotion.
Suitable long-term credit at lower interest rates has been made available for rural
and other development needs.
The Commonwealth Development Bank, the trading banks, term loan fund of $246
million, adds a new dimension to the array of credit facilities available to farmers.
Decentralisation requires practical policies which make country area profitable
locations for industry and attractive places for people to live. Housing must be
available, so must phones and TV, air services - including freight.
For Commonwealth Aid Roads grants we are providing $750 million in the current
five-year period; $150 million this year, rising to $170 million the year after next
and $126 million is being found for nearly 2000 miles of rail standardisation and
reconstruction.
Our Government acted through State Government to help those affected by the
drought. So far $57 million has been provided. Ways must be found to mitigate the
effects of drought; to reduce and alleviate the personal heartbreak and national
losses which go with them.
BEEF ROADS
We have given special attention to developing the North and 4000 miles of beef roads
have been approved. More are under study and $57 million is being provided for beef
roads in Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
We have found millions of dollars for port facilities in Western Australia and
Queensland: at Weipa in Queensland, and help at Gladstone; in Western Australia
more than $6 million for port improvements at Derby, Wyndham and Broome.
We have found $12 million for stage one of the Ord irrigation project.
In Queensland vast areas - 11 million acres - are being turned into high-productive
pastures. We are finding $23 million for this and $1 million is being provided this
year for research into tropical pastures.
Freight on superphosphate to Darwin will be subsidised and tax concessions allowed
for mining with $42 million for oil search subsidies.
24
INDUSTRIES
Nothing contributes more to northern development than the sound and profitable
expansion of the industries already located in the north.
What has been done for sugar, tobacco, beef and for mineral development is
conscious major policy for northern development.
These are part of the whole pattern of policies for the development of the north and
the balanced development of the whole of Australia.
I said at the beginning that we had a constant objective; to make Australia strong and
safe; prosperous at home; respected and trusted throughout the world. I have spoken
of some of the things we have done; of what we are doing.
These are not disjointed actions, independent of one another; thought up to get some
votes, or some credit, or to appease some group.
They are all parts of a total; policies all designed for the one overriding purpose; to
make Australia strong, safe, prosperous.
We can be proud of what has been achieved; of Australia’s great and growing
economic strength; of high and rising living standards; of the continuous
improvements in education, housing, social services.
Because we have honoured our obligations and are playing our part in resisting
aggression today we can be confident of our own future safety and security, of the
strength of our alliances, of the assured protection of the United States should we
ever be threatened.
The Australia of today is a base on which an even stronger, safer, more prosperous
Australia will be built over the next decade.1
1 Notes: The particular countries with which Australia has a special relationship are defined
as the Commonwealth countries. ANZUS is a regional security treaty.
7. Entry Test
This entry test has to be completed and sent to the supervisor before the production
coding can be started. It’s a final test of the coder’s grasp of the classification scheme
of the Manifesto project.
Country: USA
Name of the Party/Alliance: The Democratic Party
Year: 2008
Title: Democratic National Platform
(extracts)
Preamble
We come together at a defining moment in the history of our nation – the nation that
led the 20th century, built a thriving middle class, defeated fascism and communism,
and provided bountiful opportunity to many. We Democrats have a special
commitment to this promise of America. We believe that every American, whatever
their background or station in life, should have the chance to get a good education, to
work at a good job with good wages, to raise and provide for a family, to live in safe
surroundings, and to retire with dignity and security. We believe that each
succeeding generation should have the opportunity, through hard work, service and
sacrifice, to enjoy a brighter future than the last.
Over the past eight years, our nation’s leaders have failed us. Sometimes they invited
calamity, rushing us into an ill-considered war in Iraq. But other times, when
calamity arrived in the form of hurricanes or financial storms, they sat back, doing
too little too late, and too poorly. The list of failures of this Administration is historic.
So, we come together not only to replace this President and his party –and not only
to offer policies that will undo the damage they have wrought. Today, we pledge a
return to core moral principles like stewardship, service to others, personal
responsibility, shared sacrifice and a fair shot for all –values that emanate from the
integrity and optimism of our Founders and generations of Americans since. Today,
we Democrats offer leaders – from the White House to the State House – worthy of
this country’s trust.
I. Renewing the American Dream
Jumpstart the Economy and Provide Middle Class Americans Immediate Relief
We will provide an immediate energy rebate to American families struggling with
the record price of gasoline and the skyrocketing cost of other necessities – to spend
on those basic needs and energy efficient measures. We will devote $50 billion to
26
jumpstarting the economy, helping economic growth, and preventing another one
million jobs from being lost.
We support investments in infrastructure to replenish the highway trust fund, invest
in road and bridge maintenance and fund new, fasttracked projects to repair schools.
We believe that it is essential to take immediate steps to stem the loss of
manufacturing jobs. Taking these immediate measures will provide good jobs and
will help the economy today. But generating truly shared prosperity is only possible
if we also address our most significant long-run challenges like the rising cost of
health care, energy, and education.
Good Jobs with Good Pay
Democrats are committed to an economic policy that produces good jobs with good
pay and benefits. That is why we support the right to organize. We know that when
unions are allowed to do their job of making sure that workers get their fair share,
they pull people out of poverty and create a stronger middle class. We will strengthen
the ability of workers to organize unions and fight to pass the Employee Free Choice
Act. We will fight to ban the permanent replacement of striking workers, so that
workers can stand up for themselves without worrying about losing their
livelihoods.
In America, if someone is willing to work, he or she should be able to make ends
meet and have the opportunity to prosper. To that end, we will raise the minimum
wage and index it to inflation. We will modernize the unemployment insurance
program to close gaps and extend benefits to the workers who now fall outside it.
Opportunity for Women
When women still earn 76 cents for every dollar that a man earns, it doesn’t just hurt
women; it hurts families and children. We will pass the “Lilly Ledbetter” Act, which
will make it easier to combat pay discrimination. We will invest in women-owned
small businesses and remove the capital gains tax on startup small businesses. We
recognize that women are the majority of adults who make the minimum wage, and
are particularly hard-hit by recession and poverty; we will protect Social Security,
increase the minimum wage, and expand programs to combat poverty and improve
education so that parents and children can lift themselves out of poverty. We will
work to combat violence against women.
A World Class Education for Every Child
The Democratic Party firmly believes that graduation from a quality public school
and the opportunity to succeed in college must be the birthright of every child–not
the privilege of the few. We must prepare all our students with the 21st century
skills they need to succeed by progressing to a new era of mutual responsibility in
education. We must set high standards for our children, but we must also hold
ourselves accountable–our schools, our teachers, our parents, business leaders, our
community and our elected leaders. And we must come together, form partnerships,
and commit to providing the resources and reforms necessary to help every child
reach their full potential.
Creating New Jobs by Rebuilding American Infrastructure
A century ago, Teddy Roosevelt called together leaders from business and
government to develop a plan for the next century’s infrastructure. It falls to us to do
the same. We will start a National Infrastructure Reinvestment Bank that can
leverage private investment in infrastructure improvements, and create nearly two
million new good jobs. We will undertake projects that maximize our safety and
security and ability to compete, which we will fund as we bring the war in Iraq to a
responsible close. We will modernize our power grid, which will help conservation
and spur the development and distribution of clean energy. We need a national
transportation policy, including high-speed rail and light rail. We can invest in our
bridges, roads, and public transportation so that people have choices in how they get
to work. We will ensure every American has access to highspeed broadband and we
will take on special interests in order to unleash the power of the wireless spectrum.
Support Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Encouraging new industry and creating jobs means giving more support to American
entrepreneurs. We will exempt all start-up companies from capital gains taxes and
provide them a tax credit for health insurance. We will help small businesses facing
high energy costs. We will work to remove bureaucratic barriers for small and start-
up businesses–for example, by making the patent process more efficient and reliable.
Real Leadership for Rural America
Rural America is home to 60 million Americans. The agricultural sector is critical to
the rural economy and to all Americans. We depend on those in agriculture to
produce the food, feed, fiber, and fuel that support our society. Thankfully, American
farmers possess an unrivaled capacity to produce an abundance of these high-quality
products.
All Americans, urban and rural, hold a shared interest in preserving and increasing
the economic vitality of family farms. We will continue to develop and advance
policies that promote sustainable and local agriculture, including funding for soil and
water conservation programs.
28
Restoring Fairness to Our Tax Code
We must reform our tax code. We’ll eliminate federal income taxes for millions of
retirees, because all seniors deserve to live out their lives with dignity and respect.
We will not increase taxes on any family earning under $250,000 and we will offer
additional tax cuts for middle class families. We will dramatically simplify tax filings
so that millions of Americans can do their taxes in less than five minutes.
II. Renewing American Leadership
At moments of great peril in the last century, American leaders such as Franklin
Roosevelt, Harry Truman, and John F. Kennedy managed both to protect the American
people and to expand opportunity for the next generation. They used our strengths to
show people everywhere America at its best. Today, we are again called to provide
visionary leadership. This century’s threats are at least as dangerous as, and in some
ways more complex than, those we have confronted in the past.
We will confront these threats head on while working with our allies and restoring
our standing in the world. We will pursue a tough, smart, and principled national
security strategy. It is a strategy that recognizes that we have interests not just in
Baghdad, but in Kandahar and Karachi, in Beijing, Berlin, Brasilia and Bamako. It is a
strategy that contends with the many disparate forces shaping this century,
including: the fundamentalist challenge to freedom; the emergence of new powers
like China, India, Russia, and a united Europe; and the spread of lethal weapons.
Barack Obama will focus this strategy on seven goals: (i) ending the war in Iraq
responsibly; (ii) defeating Al Qaeda and combating violent extremism; (iii) securing
nuclear weapons and materials from terrorists; (iv) revitalizing and supporting our
military; (v) renewing our partnerships to promote our common security; (vi)
advancing democracy and development; and (vii) protecting our planet by achieving
energy security and combating climate change.
Recommit to an Alliance of the Americas
We recognize that the security and prosperity of the United States is fundamentally
tied to the future of the Americas. We believe that in the 21st century, the U.S. must
treat Latin America and the Caribbean as full partners, just as our neighbors to the
south should reject the bombast of authoritarian bullies. Our relationship with
Canada, our long-time ally, should be strengthened and enhanced.
Advancing Democracy, Development, and Respect for Human Rights
No country in the world has benefited more from the worldwide expansion of
democracy than the United States. Democracies are our best trading partners, our
most valuable allies, and the nations with which we share our deepest values. The
Democratic Party reaffirms its longstanding commitment to support democratic
institutions and practices worldwide. A more democratic world is a more peaceful
and prosperous place. Yet democracy cannot be imposed by force from the outside; it
must be nurtured with moderates on the inside by building democratic institutions.
III. Renewing the American Community
Service
The future of our country will be determined not only by our government and our
policies but through the efforts of the American people. That is why we will ask all
Americans to be actively involved in meeting the challenges of the new century. We
will double the size of the Peace Corps, enable more to serve in the military,
integrate service into primary education, and create new opportunities for
experienced and retired persons to serve. And if you invest in America, America will
invest in you: we will increase support for service-learning, establish tax incentives
for college students who serve, and create scholarships for students who pledge to
become teachers. We will use the Internet to better match volunteers to service
opportunities. In these ways, we will unleash the power of service to meet America’s
challenges in a uniquely American way.
Federal Lands
We will create a new vision for conservation that works with local communities to
conserve our existing publicly-owned lands while dramatically expanding
investments in conserving and restoring forests, grasslands, and wetlands across
America for generations to come. Unlike the current Administration, we will reinvest
in our nation’s forests by providing federal agencies with resources to reduce the
threat of wildland fires and promote sustainable forest product industries for rural
economic development. We will recognize that our parks are national treasures, and
will ensure that they are protected as part of the overall natural system so they are
here for generations to come. We are committed to conserving the lands used by
hunters and anglers, and we will open millions of new acres of land to public hunting
and fishing.
30
IV. Renewing American Democracy
Open, Accountable, and Ethical Government
In Barack Obama’s Administration, we will open up the doors of democracy. We will
use technology to make government more transparent, accountable, and inclusive.
Rather than obstruct people’s use of the Freedom of Information Act, we will require
that agencies conduct significant business in public and release all relevant
information unless an agency reasonably foresees harm to a protected interest.
We will lift the veil of secret deals in Washington by publishing searchable, online
information about federal grants, contracts, earmarks, loans, and lobbyist contacts
with government officials. We will put all non-emergency bills that Congress has
passed online for five days, to allow the American public to review and comment on
them before they are signed into law. We will require Cabinet officials to have
periodic national online town hall meetings to discuss issues before their agencies.
Note: The USA has special relationships with the UK and Canada.
8. Definition of Standard Categories
DOMAIN 1: External Relations
101 Foreign Special Relationships: Positive
Favourable mentions of particular countries with which the manifesto country has a
special relationship. For example, in the British case: former colonies; in the Swedish
case: the rest of Scandinavia; the need for co-operation with and/or aid to such
countries.
102 Foreign Special Relationships: Negative
Negative mentions of particular countries with which the manifesto country has a
special relationship; otherwise as 101, but negative.
103 Anti-Imperialism
Negative references to exerting strong influence (political, military or commercial)
over other states; negative references to controlling other countries as if they were
part of an empire; favourable mentions of de-colonisation; favourable references to
greater self-government and independence for colonies; negative references to the
imperial behaviour of the manifesto and/or other countries.
104 Military: Positive
Need to maintain or increase military expenditure; modernising armed forces and
improvement in military strength; rearmament and self-defence; need to keep
military treaty obligations; need to secure adequate manpower in the military;
importance external security.
105 Military: Negative
Favourable mentions of decreasing military expenditures; disarmament; ‘evils of
war’; promises to reduce conscription; otherwise as 104, but negative.
106 Peace
Peace as a general goal; declarations of belief in peace and peaceful means of solving
crises; desirability of countries joining in negotiations with hostile countries.
107 Internationalism: Positive
Need for international co-operation; co-operation with specific countries other than
those coded in 101; need for aid to developing countries; need for world planning of
resources; need for international courts; support for any international goal or world
state; support for UN.
108 European Community/Union: Positive
Favourable mentions of European Community/Union in general; desirability of
32
expanding the European Community/Union and/or of increasing its competence;
desirability of expanding the competences of the European Parliament; desirability
of the manifesto country joining (or remaining a member).
109 Internationalism: Negative
Favourable mentions of national independence and sovereignty as opposed to
internationalism; otherwise as 107, but negative.
110 European Community/Union: Negative
Hostile mentions of the European Community/Union; opposition to specific European
policies which are preferred by European authorities; opposition to the net-
contribution of the manifesto country to the EU budget; otherwise as 108, but
negative.
DOMAIN 2: Freedom and Democracy
201 Freedom and Human Rights
Favourable mentions of importance of personal freedom and civil rights; freedom
from bureaucratic control; freedom of speech; freedom from coercion in the political
and economic spheres; individualism in the manifesto country and in other
countries.
202 Democracy
Favourable mentions of democracy as a method or goal in national and other
organisations; involvement of all citizens in decision-making as well as generalised
support for the manifesto country’s democracy.
203 Constitutionalism: Positive
Support for specific aspects of the constitution; use of constitutionalism as an
argument for policy as well as general approval of the constitutional way of doing
things.
204 Constitutionalism: Negative
Opposition to the constitution in general or to specific aspects; otherwise as 203, but
negative.
DOMAIN 3: Political System
301 Decentralisation
Support for federalism or devolution; more regional autonomy for policy or
economy; support for keeping up local and regional customs and symbols; favourable
mentions of special consideration for local areas; deference to local expertise;
favourable mentions of the territorial subsidiary principle.
302 Centralisation
Opposition to political decision-making at lower political levels; support for more
centralisation in political and administrative procedures; otherwise as 301, but
negative.
303 Governmental and Administrative Efficiency
Need for efficiency and economy in government and administration; cutting down
civil service; improving governmental procedures; general appeal to make the
process of government and administration cheaper and more effective.
304 Political Corruption
Need to eliminate corruption, and associated abuse, in political and public life.
305 Political Authority
Favourable mentions of strong government, including government stability;
manifesto party’s competence to govern and/or other party’s lack of such
competence.
DOMAIN 4: Economy
401 Free Enterprise
Favourable mentions of free enterprise capitalism; superiority of individual
enterprise over state and control systems; favourable mentions of private property
rights, personal enterprise and initiative; need for unhampered individual
enterprises.
402 Incentives
Need for wage and tax policies to induce enterprise; encouragement to start
enterprises; need for financial and other incentives such as subsidies.
403 Market Regulation
Need for regulations designed to make private enterprises work better; actions
against monopolies and trusts, and in defence of consumer and small business;
encouraging economic competition; social market economy.
404 Economic Planning
Favourable mentions of long-standing economic planning of a consultative or
indicative nature, need for government to create such a plan.
405 Corporatism
Favourable mentions of the need for the collaboration of employers and trade union
organisations in overall economic planning and direction through the medium of
tripartite bodies of government, employers, and trade unions.
34
406 Protectionism: Positive
Favourable mentions of extension or maintenance of tariffs to protect internal
markets; other domestic economic protectionism such as quota restrictions; in
favour of export subsidies.
407 Protectionism: Negative
Support for the concept of free trade; otherwise as 406, but negative.
408 Economic Goals
Statements of intent to pursue any economic goals not covered by other categories in
Domain 4. This category is created to catch an overall interest of parties in economics
and, therefore, covers a variety of economic goals.
409 Keynesian Demand Management
Favourable mentions of demand-oriented economic policy; economic policy devoted
to the reduction of depressions and/or to increase private demand through
increasing public demand and/or through increasing social expenditures.
410 Economic Growth
Need to encourage or facilitate greater production; need to take measures to aid this;
appeal for greater production and importance of productivity to the economy; the
paradigm of growth.
411 Technology and Infrastructure
Importance of modernisation of industry and methods of transport and
communication; importance of science and technological developments in industry;
need for training and research. This does not imply education in general (see
category 506). This also covers public spending on infrastructure such as streets and
harbours.
412 Controlled Economy
General need for direct government control of economy; control over prices, wages,
rents, etc.; state intervention into the economic system.
413 Nationalisation
Favourable mentions of government ownership, partial or complete, including
government ownership of land.
414 Economic Orthodoxy
Need for traditional economic orthodoxy, e.g. reduction of budget deficits,
retrenchment in crisis, thrift and savings; support for traditional economic
institutions such as stock market and banking system; support for strong currency.
415 Marxist Analysis
Positive references (typically but not necessary by communist parties) to the specific
use of Marxist-Leninist terminology and analysis of situations which are otherwise
uncodable.
416 Anti-Growth Economy
Favourable mentions of anti-growth politics and steady state economy; sustainable
development.
DOMAIN 5: Welfare and Quality of Life
501 Environmental Protection
Preservation of countryside, forests, etc.; general preservation of natural resources
against selfish interests; proper use of national parks; soil banks, etc; environmental
improvement.
502 Culture
Need to provide cultural and leisure facilities including arts and sport; need to spend
money on museums, art galleries etc.; need to encourage worthwhile leisure
activities and cultural mass media.
503 Social Justice
Concept of equality; need for fair treatment of all people; special protection for
underprivileged; need for fair distribution of resources; removal of class barriers;
end of discrimination such as racial or sexual discrimination, etc.
504 Welfare State Expansion
Favourable mentions of need to introduce, maintain or expand any social service or
social security scheme; support for social services such as health service or social
housing.
Note: This category excludes education.
505 Welfare State Limitation
Limiting expenditure on social services or social security; favourable mentions of the
social subsidiary principle; otherwise as 504, but negative.
506 Education Expansion
Need to expand and/or improve educational provision at all levels. This excludes
technical training which is coded under 411.
507 Education Limitation
Limiting expenditure on education; otherwise as 506, but negative.
36
DOMAIN 6: Fabric of Society
601 National Way of Life: Positive
Appeals to patriotism and/or nationalism; suspension of some freedoms in order to
protect the state against subversion; support for established national ideas.
602 National Way of Life: Negative
Against patriotism and/or nationalism; opposition to the existing national state;
otherwise as 601, but negative.
603 Traditional Morality: Positive
Favourable mentions of traditional moral values; prohibition, censorship and
suppression of immorality and unseemly behaviour; maintenance and stability of
family; religion.
604 Traditional Morality: Negative
Opposition to traditional moral values; support for divorce, abortion etc.; otherwise
as 603, but negative.
605 Law and Order
Enforcement of all laws; actions against crime; support and resources for police;
tougher attitudes in courts; importance of internal security.
606 Social Harmony
Appeal for national effort and solidarity; need for society to see itself as united;
appeal for public spiritedness; decrying anti-social attitudes in times of crisis;
support for the public interest; favourable mention of the civil society (Note: This
category neither captures what your country can do for you nor what you can do for
your country, but what you can do for your fellow citizens.).
607 Multiculturalism: Positive
Favourable mentions of cultural diversity, communalism, cultural plurality and
pillarization; preservation of autonomy of religious, linguistic heritages within the
country including special educational provisions.
608 Multiculturalism: Negative
Enforcement or encouragement of cultural integration; otherwise as 607, but
negative.
DOMAIN 7: Social Groups
701 Labour Groups: Positive
Favourable references to labour groups, working class, unemployed; support for
trade unions; good treatment of manual and other employees.
702 Labour Groups: Negative
Negative references to trade unions such as ‘abuse of power’; otherwise as 701, but
negative.
703 Agriculture and Farmers
Support for agriculture and farmers; any policy aimed specifically at benefiting
these.
704 Middle Class and Professional Groups
Favourable references to middle class, professional groups, such as physicians or
lawyers; old and new middle class.
705 Underprivileged Minority Groups
Favourable references to underprivileged minorities who are defined neither in
economic nor in demographic terms, e.g. the handicapped, homosexuals, immigrants,
etc.
706 Non-economic Demographic Groups
Favourable mentions of, or need for, assistance to women, old people, young people,
linguistic groups, etc; special interest groups of all kinds.
9. Definition of Subcategories
1011 Russia/USSR/CIS: Positive
Favourable mentions of Russia, the USSR, the CMEA bloc or the Community of
Independent States (subcategory of 101).
1012 Western States: Positive
Favourable mentions of Western states, including the USA and Germany (subcategory
of 101).
1013 Eastern European Countries: positive
Favourable mentions of Eastern European countries in general (subcategory of 101).
1014 Baltic States: Positive
Favourable mentions of the Baltic states, including other states bordering the Baltic
Sea (subcategory of 101).
1015 Nordic Council: Positive
Favourable mentions of the Nordic Council (subcategory of 101).
38
1016 SFR Yugoslavia: Positive
Favourable mentions of countries formerly belonging to SFR Yugoslavia including
special relationships with Montenegro, Macedonia, Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia-
Herzegovina (subcategory of 101).
1021 Russia/USSR/CIS: Negative
Negative mentions of Russia, the USSR or the Community of Independent States
(subcategory of 102).
1022 Western States: Negative
Negative mentions of Western states, including the USA and Germany (subcategory of
102).
1023 East European Countries: Negative
Negative mentions of Eastern European countries in general (subcategory of 102).
1024 Baltic States: Negative
Negative references to the Baltic states (subcategory of 102).
1025 Nordic Council: Negative
Negative references to the Nordic Council (subcategory of 102).
1026 SFR Yugoslavia: Negative
Negative mentions of countries formerly belonging to SFR Yugoslavia including
negative references to Montenegro, Macedonia, Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia-
Hercegovina (subcategory of 102).
1031 Russian Army: Negative
Need to withdraw the Russian army from the territory of the manifesto country;
need to receive reparations for the damage caused by the Russian army or other
Soviet institutions (subcategory of 103).
1032 Independence: Positive
Favourable mentions of the independence and sovereignty of the manifesto country
(subcategory of 103).
1033 Rights of Nations: Positive
Favourable mentions of freedom, rights and interests of nations (subcategory of 103).
2021 Transition to Democracy
General references to the transition process of one-party states to pluralist
democracy (subcategory of 202).
2022 Restrictive Citizenship
Favourable mentions of restrictions in citizenship; restrictions in enfranchisement
with respect to (ethnic) groups (subcategory of 202).
2023 Lax Citizenship
Favourable mentions of lax citizenship and election laws; no or few restrictions in
enfranchisement (subcategory of 202).
2031 Presidential Regime: Positive
Support for current presidential regime (subcategory of 203); statements in favour of
a powerful presidency (subcategory of 204 for parliamentary regimes).
2032 Republic: Positive
Support for the republican form of government as opposed to monarchy (subcategory
of 203).
2033 Checks and Balances (to be coded for Mexico, only)
Support for checks and balances and separation of powers, and specifically for
limiting the powers of the presidency by increasing legislative/judicial powers, or
transferring some executive powers to the legislature or judiciary (subcategory of
203).
2041 Monarchy: Positive
Support for a monarchy, including conceptions of constitutional monarchy
(subcategory of 204).
3011 Republican Powers: Positive
Favourable mentions of stronger republican powers (subcategory of 301).
3051 Public Situation: Negative
Negative references to the situation in public life after the founding elections
(subcategory of 305).
3052 Communist: Positive
Co-operation with former authorities/communists in the transition period; pro-
communist involvement in the transition process; and 'let sleeping dogs lie' in
dealing with the nomenclature (subcategory of 305).
3053 Communist: Negative
Against communist involvement in democratic government; weeding out the
collaborators from governmental service; need for political coalition except
communist parties (subcategory of 305).
40
3054 Rehabilitation and Compensation
References to civic rehabilitation of politically persecuted people in the communist
era; references to juridical compensation concerning communist expropriations;
moral compensation (subcategory of 305).
3055 Political Coalitions
References to the need of broader political coalition; need for co-operation at the
political level; necessity of collaboration among all political forces (subcategory of
305).
4011 Privatisation: Positive
Favourable references to privatisation (subcategory of 401).
4012 Control of Economy: Negative
Negative references to the general need for direct governmental control of the
economy subcategory of 401).
4013 Property-Restitution: Positive
Favourable references to the physical restitution of property to previous owners
(subcategory of 401).
4014 Privatisation Vouchers: Positive
Favourable references to privatisation vouchers (subcategory of 401).
4121 Social Ownership: Positive
Favourable references to the creation or preservation of co-operative or non-state
social ownership within a market economy (subcategory of 412).
4122 Mixed Economy: Positive
Favourable references to mixed ownership within a market economy (subcategory of
412).
4123 Publicly-Owned Industry: Positive
Positive references to the concept of publicly-owned industries (subcategory of 412).
4124 Socialist Property: Positive
Positive references to socialist property, including public and co-operative property;
negative references to privatisation (subcategory of 412).
4131 Property-Restitution: Negative
Negative references to the physical restitution of property to previous owners
(subcategory of 413).
4132 Privatisation: Negative
Negative references to the privatisation system; need to change the privatisation
system (subcategory of 413).
5021 Private-Public Mix in Culture
Necessity of private provisions due to economic constraints; private funding in
addition to public activity (subcategory of 502).
5031 Private-Public Mix in Social Justice
Necessity of private initiatives due to economic constraints (subcategory of 503).
5041 Private-Public Mix in Welfare
Necessity of private welfare provisions due to economic constraints; desirability of
competition in welfare service provisions; private funding in addition to public
activity (subcategory of 504).
5061 Private-Public Mix in Education
Necessity of private education due to economic constraints; desirability of
competition in education (subcategory of 506).
6011 The Karabakh Issue
Positive references to the unity of Karabakh and Armenia or the recognition of the
independent Republic of Karabakh; rendering assistance to Karabakh (subcategory of
601).
6012 Rebuilding the USSR
Favourable mentions of the reunification of all republics and nations living on the
former territory of the USSR into a new common (democratic) state or into a
common economic space whereby the new union would be the guarantor of the
manifesto country's sovereignty; negative references to the dissolution of the USSR
and the respective treaties (subcategory of 601).
6013 National Security
Support for or need to maintain national security in all spheres of social life; policies
devoted to this goal (subcategory of 601).
6014 Cyprus Issue (to be coded for Cyprus, only)
All references concerning the division of Cyprus in a Greek and a Turkish part
(subcategory of 601).
6061 General Crisis
Identification of a general crisis in the country (subcategory of 606).
42
6071 Cultural Autonomy: Positive
Favourable mentions of cultural autonomy (subcategory of 607).
6072 Multiculturalism pro Roma
Favourable mentions of cultural autonomy of Roma (subcategory of 607).
6081 Multiculturalism against Roma
Negative mentions of cultural autonomy of Roma (subcategory of 608).
7051 Minorities Inland
References to manifesto country minorities in foreign countries; positive references
to manifesto country minorities (subcategory of 705).
7052 Minorities Abroad
References to ethnic minorities living in the manifesto country such as Latvians
living in Estonia (subcategory of 705).
7061 War Participants
Favourable mentions of, or need for, assistance to people taking part in the war on
the territory of ex-Yugoslavia (subcategory of 706).
7062 Refugees
Favourable mentions of, or need for, assistance to people who left their homes
because of the war (for instance, on the territory of ex-Yugoslavia) or were forcibly
displaced (subcategory of 706).
10. Literature
Berelson, Bernard, Content Analysis in Communication Research, New York: Hafner
Publishing Company 1952.
Budge, Ian, David Robertson, Derek Hearl (eds.), Ideology, Strategy and Party Change:
Spatial Analysis of Post-War Election Programs in 19 Democracies, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 1987.
Budge, Ian, Hans-Dieter Klingemann, Andrea Volkens, Judith Bara, Eric Tanenbaum
with Richard C. Fording, Derek J. Hearl, Hee Min Kim, Michael d. McDonald, Sylvia
Mendes, Mapping Policy Preferences. Estimates for Parties, Electors and
Governments, 1945-1998, Oxford: Oxford University Press 2001.
Klingemann, Hans-Dieter, Richard I. Hofferbert, Ian Budge, Parties, Policies, and
Democracy, Boulder/San Francisco/Oxford: Westview Press 1994.
Laver, Michael, Ian Budge (eds.), Party Policy and Coalition Government, New York: St.
Martin’s Press 1992.
Rallings, Colin. 1987. “The Influence of Election Programmes: Britain and Canada
1945−1979.” In: Ideology, Strategy and Party Change. Spatial Analysis of Post-War
Election Programmes in 19 Democracies, eds. Ian Budge, David Robertson, and
Derek Hearl. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1−14. Robertson, David,
A Theory of Party Competition, London: John Wiley & Sons 1976.
Sartori, Giovanni, Parties and Party Systems. A Framework for Analysis, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 1976.
Thomson, Robert. 2001. “The Programme to Policy Linkage: The Fulfilment of Election
Pledges on Socio-Economic Policy in the Netherlands, 1986−1998.” European
Journal of Political Research 40 (2): 171−197.
Volkens, Andrea, Manifesto Coding Instructions (Second Revised Edition), Discussion
Paper FS III 02-201, Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin für Sozialforschung (WZB) 2002.
Volkens, Andrea, Sonja Alonso, Braulio Gómez, Content Analysing Multi-level
Authority and Cultural Identity Claims. A Complement to the Comparative
Manifestos Project (CMP) Exemplified for Spanish Regional Manifestos, Discussion
Paper SP IV 2009-202, Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin für Sozialforschung (WZB)
2009.
44